 A Green New Deal
      for Europe
Manifesto for the European
 election campaign 2009

       A Green New Deal for Europe
Europe needs a new direction. The financial crisis and credit crunch have brought the
failings of current economic and social policies sharply into focus. They have exposed a
wider systemic failure. The world is facing a serious and fundamental resource crunch that
will impact on every aspect of our lives, from the food we eat to the energy we use. We are
also at risk of running out of time to prevent a full-blown climate crisis.
These ‘crises’ should be seen as an opportunity to transform our economic and social
system into one that will offer generations-to-come a future based on stability, sufficiency
and sustainability.
Europe faces social, economic and environmental challenges that transcend borders. As
the financial crisis once again demonstrated, only by cooperating - at European and global
level - can we rise above these challenges. This requires a European Union acting strongly
for the future of all its citizens and residents. The Greens want to build solutions for a
sustainable future.
Rising to the challenges brings real opportunities. Shifting to a greener economy and com-
bating climate change will boost employment and make us more self-sufficient, reducing
our damaging reliance on energy imports. A more sustainable approach to our agricultural,
marine and energy resources is crucial at a time when energy and food prices are hitting
low and middle income people hard.
The Greens want a responsible Europe. The European Union should defend social sys-
tems and labour conditions from the pressures of fierce and unfettered competition, both
within Europe and beyond. Economic interests must not come at the expense of human
and civil rights. The European Union must listen and be accountable to its citizens and
residents, while championing peace, democracy and human rights around the world.
The dominant neoliberal ideology in Europe has established a system where the interests
of the few come before the general well-being of its citizens. They have put the profits of
polluting industries ahead of the environment and public health. The mantra of competi-
tiveness and growth has been used to lower social standards and labour conditions. The
neoliberal majority in the European Parliament, the Council and the European Commis-
sion is guilty of bowing to the demands of industry lobbies, putting short-term profits before
the general interest. The Greens offer a real alternative for Europe.
The Green New Deal means: a Europe of solidarity that can guarantee its citizens a good
quality of life based on economic, social and environmental sustainability; a truly demo-
cratic Europe that acts for its citizens and not just narrow industry interests; a Europe that
acts for a green future.

A real alternative for Europe: securing
our energy and environmental future              We must significantly improve on the currently
                                                 wasteful way we use energy, while massively
                                                 expanding energy from renewable sources.
                                                 This will reduce our dangerous dependence
We need a resource revolution to shift from      on the import of dirty energy from unstable
our present course of over-exploitation and      countries, with the damaging volatility this
environmental destruction. If we continue to     causes for our economies and societies.
ravage our finite natural resources, we will
need two planets to sustain our lifestyles with- We must capitalise on the already-existing
in 25 years. This course is not just economi-    ways to save energy. Using less energy and
cally unsustainable, it seriously threatens our  using it better will be crucial to maintaining a
climate, ecosystems and biodiversity.            good quality of life at a time of rising energy
                                                 prices. The Greens want Europe to place
Business as usual is not an option. The          much greater priority on energy efficien-
impact of a resource crunch and dangerous        cy, setting a binding target to reduce energy
climate change would dwarf that of any finan-    consumption 20% by 2020, as well as sup-
cial and economic crisis. Thankfully, most of    porting and promoting the intelligent design
the solutions are already at hand. The cur-      of heating and cooling technology both in in-
rent economic slowdown is an opportunity to      dustry and in the housing sector.
transform our system, so that we can avoid
the extremes of the resource and climate cri-
ses, and secure a good quality of life.
If we are to avoid dangerous climate change,
we need to seriously reduce our greenhouse
gas emissions. The Greens want the EU to
commit to emissions reductions of 40% by
2020 and 80-95% by 2050, based on 1990
levels, in line with the current recommenda-
tions of the UN IPCC. Europe must also play a
leading role in forging a binding international
climate agreement under the UN framework         Renewables must be put at the centre of
based on the latest updated science. This        European energy policy for the 21st Centu-
agreement must commit industrialised coun-       ry. The Greens are calling for the creation of a
tries to the necessary emissions reductions,     European Renewables Community (ERENE)
as well as recognising their responsibility      to support the long-term goal of 100% energy
to support mitigation and adaptation efforts     from renewable sources. We need a concert-
in developing countries, including reducing      ed investment drive in green technologies in
emissions from deforestation and forest deg-     which the European Investment Bank must
radation, particularly from tropical forests.    play a role. A real renewables boom requires
                                                 a new approach to energy supply: truly un-
Combating climate change is a win-win            bundling ownership of distribution and pro-
process. A combination of ambitious and          duction, while promoting a grid without bor-
binding targets, of incentives and of public     ders and the smarter use of energy.
investments into green technologies and ser-
vices will help create millions of green jobs in Nuclear energy cannot be part of the solu-
Europe and tens of millions worldwide, which     tion to climate change. Expensive invest-
are much needed at a time of economic            ments in this dead-end technology will not
slowdown. The EU must set itself the target      be able to contribute to the urgently-needed
of creating five million green collar jobs over  emissions reductions and will divert much-
the coming five years.                           needed funds from the promotion of sustain-
                                                 able energy production.

Uranium is a finite fuel source and the EU is    The Greens want Europe to ensure its citi-
overwhelmingly dependent on imports from         zens have access to healthy food at fair
unstable countries, so nuclear is clearly not    prices, rather than the limited options the
the answer to our long term energy security.     food industry wants to offer them. Farming,
On top of this, the associated risks of nuclear  fishing and food policies should encourage
are as real now as they have always been,        mutual responsibility between farmers, fish-
whether in terms of operation, fuel produc-      ermen, authorities and consumers.
tion or managing nuclear waste. This is not to
mention the possibility of terrorist attacks and The Common Agricultural Policy has encour-
nuclear proliferation to questionable regimes    aged agricultural irresponsibility, with agro-in-
and even rogue groups.                           dustry dictating the market terms and gearing
                                                 production to capitalise on subsidies, regard-
                                                 less of the environmental consequences. The
                                                 Greens want to use the upcoming review to
                                                 transform EU agricultural policy in a way that
                                                 supports and encourages farmers to produce
                                                 quality food in a sustainable way. The future
                                                 of agriculture lies in organic farming and fair
                                                 trade.
                                                 Crucial to this is a ban on genetically-modi-
                                                 fied organisms (GMOs). GM crops pose a
                                                 serious threat to Europe’s biodiversity, as
                                                 well as the risks of cross-contaminating or-
                                                 ganic and conventional farming. For this rea-
Revolutionising how we use energy and end-       son, the Greens are working to make the
ing our damaging dependence on oil means         European Union a GMO-free zone.
we must also move green. Transport is the
fastest growing source of manmade green-         Farming and food policies should promote
house gas emissions. The EU needs to ac-         local markets for agricultural products, elimi-
tively work to create a sustainable trans-       nating unnecessary transportation. They
port system.                                     must encourage more sustainable produc-
                                                 tion methods that aim to conserve biodiver-
Ending the direct and indirect subsidisation of  sity and water resources, and enhance soil
inefficient and polluting transport modes, like  fertility, reducing the use of toxic and pollut-
aviation and road transport, is an important     ing pesticides and fertilisers. This approach
step in ensuring the full environmental costs    will help reduce greenhouse gas emissions
are taken into account. We want to speed-up      from intensive agriculture. It will also reduce
investment in trans-European railroad con-       the risks to public health caused by industrial
nections and networks. Freight must be shift-    farming. Animals must be treated ethically, in
ed from roads to rail and inland waterways on    agriculture as in all other contexts.
a much bigger scale. Affordable public trans-
port and sustainable transport options in our
cities, such as cycling and walking, must be
promoted.
The resource crunch we face runs far beyond
energy resources. A more sustainable ap-
proach to our agricultural and marine resourc-
es is vital for our wellbeing, the health of our
ecosystems and their wealth of biodiversity.

                                               Social justice and globalisation:
Achieving high levels of animal protection is  Fighting for a fairer Europe
central to the Green agenda. Europe needs
much higher levels of protection for both do-
mestic and wild animals. We will continue to   The system needs change. The Greens
work to end the long distance transport of an- want to end the careless deregulation that
imals, for higher welfare standards for animal has enabled big business to dictate its own
farming, and for better implementation of ex-  terms regardless of the real impact on the
isting animal welfare legislation. More needs  economy and society at large. This approach
to be done to promote a reduction in meat      encouraged the risky speculation and over-
consumption for reasons of climate change,     exploitation that has trapped us in a dam-
food security, and animal welfare. We want     aging boom to bust cycle. We want to take
to see the end of the fur trade, and a swift   this opportunity to develop a new economy
replacement of animal tests with non-animal    driven by long-term prosperity, not short-
alternatives.                                  term profiteering. We want a responsible
                                               and stable Europe, which invests ethically
The Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) has          and where prosperity is defined by the well-
been an exercise in self-destruction, driv-    being of all its people.
ing many fish stocks to precarious levels. It
needs to be urgently reformed away from the    Financial markets must be put on a leash,
current model of waste and over-exploitation,  so they cease to be casinos in which people’s
to a tool which gives fishermen responsibil-   homes and livelihoods are the chips on the
ity for sustainably managing fisheries and     table. Their transnational nature demands a
conserving fish stocks. The EU also needs      coordinated European response that leads
to greatly enhance binding measures to pro-    and links in to international efforts. We need
tect our vulnerable seas and has to revise its an EU-level watchdog with teeth – a body
exploitative fishing agreements with African   to scrutinise and regulate financial markets
countries.                                     and services. EU regulations must rule out
                                               any kind of tax evasion and prevent harmful
A healthy Europe is a wealthy Europe. EU       tax competition for corporate revenues and
citizens are concerned about the safety of     savings, which undermines social justice.
the air they breathe, the water they use and   The regulation of the financial markets also
the food they eat. Environmental pollution     implies the negotiation of an international
damages public health, which in turn places    agreement to outlaw all tax havens.
a strain on societies and economies. The EU
needs to do more to address the threats to     Credit must be tied to realistic valuations and
public health, whether water- or air-borne,    risk. The worst excesses of uncontrolled mar-
noise, toxic substances, or through the        kets must be reined in, particularly danger-
spread of diseases. The EU has to halt the     ous short-selling practices by traders, such
loss of biodiversity at home and overseas      as hedge funds. Astronomical financial sec-
territories.                                   tor salaries and bonuses that reward risk and
                                               recklessness must be capped. The Greens
                                               have long advocated the introduction of a fi-
                                               nancial transaction levy, which would reduce
                                               speculation and generate resources which
              ********************             could be used to finance various social and
                                               environmental goals that are presently over-
                                               looked or underfunded.
                                               Financial markets must be restructured so that
                                               the general public can be offered protection.

This means guaranteeing savings and keep-       There must be equal pay for equal work for
ing loans affordable. During the financial cri- men and women alike, as well as for posted,
sis, low-cost credit must be available to sup-  immigrant or temporary workers. Equal op-
port European enterprises, especially those     portunities for all must be guaranteed both
contributing to the shift towards a more sus-   within and outside the workplace and regard-
tainable Europe.                                less of sex, age, ethnicity, disability, religion
                                                or sexual orientation.
A Green New Deal calls for massive invest-
ment in education, science and research         EU policies that weaken public services in
in green, future-oriented technologies to put   the name of competition must end. Public
Europe at the forefront of a global economic    services such as health and education are
revolution.                                     crucial to the general interest and must not
                                                be frittered away by competition rules. We
A truly prosperous, innovative, stable and      need to balance the freedom to provide social
sustainable economy requires a fairer so-       services and services of general interest with
ciety guaranteeing fair working conditions,     the obligation to guarantee equal, affordable
equal opportunities and a decent standard of    and universal access to these services.
living for all. Europe must defend social val-
ues and justice while adapting to the needs of  Nobody should suffer the indignity of liv-
changing times. Cutbacks on environmental       ing in poverty. The Green New Deal aims to
protection or compromises on social values      reverse the widening gap between rich and
would be counterproductive.                     poor and guarantee a decent minimum liv-
                                                ing standard for all Europeans. Governments
                                                should introduce minimum wages by law or
                                                collective agreements and a minimum in-
                                                come above the poverty line, guaranteed by
                                                social security, for all in need. The EU should
                                                be guided by the principle of equal pay for
                                                equal work and not be a battleground for the
                                                lowest wage.
                                                Europe must offer greater stability to people
                                                of all ages. Senior citizens must be guar-
                                                anteed a voice in society, enabling them to
The Greens want to strengthen workers’          actively participate in economic, social and
rights. The European Union suffers from         civic life. This implies guaranteeing sound
profound imbalances. It has developed cut-      pensions. Community-based services must
ting edge rules on business competition, but    exist to address the individual needs of the
labour legislation and social rights have not   frail and vulnerable. Young people must have
kept pace. Loopholes and uncertainties have     access to more secure jobs and better ac-
led to decisions by the European Court of       cess to education, training and housing.
Justice that tend to put business interest be-
fore workers’ rights.                           Europe must also play its part in building
                                                fairer societies and eliminating poverty in
Europe must lead by raising standards, rath-    other parts of the world. We need to speed
er than by a race to the bottom in terms of     up efforts to deliver on the Millennium Devel-
employment conditions. The Greens want a        opment Goals. The principle of global social
Europe that rejects social dumping and ex-      and environmental justice must guide all EU
ploitation. Social and labour rights must be    policies and its position in global institutions.
reinforced and workers must have a better       The Greens want to ensure that European
say in decisions that affect them, through col- governments finally fulfil their longstanding
lective bargaining.

                                                 Democracy and human rights: a
promises and raise EU overseas develop-          responsible EU that listens and is heard
ment aid to 0.56% of GDP by 2010 and 0.7%
by 2015.
                                                 Europe needs to listen and everyone’s
The Green New Deal puts fair trade first.        voice should be heard. The Greens want to
Trade must deliver a good deal for all involved. reform the EU, so that it can become a truly
Europe’s power in international negotiations     participatory democracy.
is much too often used to strike a bargain for
the rich at the economic, social and environ-    As the only EU institution directly-elected by
mental expense of the poor. Export subsi-        the people, the European Parliament should
dies for EU agricultural products continue to    be granted the right to initiate legislation. A
threaten the economies of poor countries and     proportion of MEPs should be elected on
must be stopped immediately. Socially unfair     Europe-wide transnational lists, which would
or environmentally-damaging practices by         allow citizens to vote for candidates that
multinationals elsewhere in the world should     represent the whole of the EU, rather than
be no more acceptable than they would be         just their national or local constituency. More
in our own backyard. Social and sustainable      needs to be done to encourage young peo-
development clauses in trade partnerships        ple to participate, for example by lowering
should therefore be binding. The WTO must        the voting age. Citizens should also have the
be made to transform its free trade agenda to    opportunity of direct democracy through Eu-
a fair and sustainable trade agenda, putting     ropean referenda on issues of Europe-wide
the protection of common goods and poverty       concern.
reduction first. Europe must practice what
it preaches.                                     The Greens will fight to apply the Charter of
                                                 Fundamental Rights, to include all members
                                                 of society and defend the rights of vulnerable
                                                 and minority groups. This implies fighting for
                                                 equal rights for women, ethnic minorities in-
              ********************               cluding the Roma, people with disabilities,
                                                 lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender people
                                                 and religious minorities as well as for social
                                                 and civil rights. This also means continuing
                                                 the fight against racism, xenophobia, anti-
                                                 Semitism and other religious intolerance,
                                                 sexism, discrimination on grounds of sexual
                                                 orientation and gender identity and all forms
                                                 of violent political extremism in the European
                                                 Union. Human rights are for all, particularly
                                                 within EU Member States.
                                                 The fundamental right of equality between
                                                 men and women must be made a reality.
                                                 Good legislation already exists but is scat-
                                                 tered around Europe. The Greens want to
                                                 see the best national laws applied across the
                                                 EU, whether regarding equality, pro-choice
                                                 issues, domestic violence, maternity and pa-
                                                 ternity leave or political representation. Only
                                                 one-third of MEPs and European Commis-
                                                 sioners are women. The Greens have an
                                                 equal number of male and female MEPs and
                                                 we want the EU to follow our lead.

The Greens demand full transparency for all       opportunity of European citizenship and the
involved in EU decision-making processes.         right to participate in the political process.
This implies taking a tough stand against
corruption at all levels. The EU itself must      People who seek asylum in Europe de-
be more accountable to its public. It is time     serve to be treated better. The Greens have
to open closed files and closed doors. The        opposed repressive laws on returning unau-
Greens will also continue to put the spotlight    thorised migrants and will continue to fight
on the shady and powerful lobbies that seek       inhumane or xenophobic legislation. Europe
to influence decisions in Brussels. Transpar-     has a duty to provide shelter and protection
ency must be an obligation, not an option.        to those who need it. Europe should be a
                                                  bridge that will allow people to come and live
Organised crime has become a transnational        here in a legal way. It will only be able to do
phenomenon and constitutes an emergency           this effectively when all EU countries share
in many Member States. Its profits have           the effort instead of leaving border countries
been growing exponentially both within and        to take the strain. A revision of the Dublin
outside the EU. Efforts to prevent criminal or-   Convention, which aims to harmonise EU
ganisations, while safeguarding civil liberties,  asylum policies and guarantees protection in
is one of the priorities of the Greens.           line with international obligations, is a must.
                                                  Europe must also do more to fight the despi-
Media play a crucial role in the democratic       cable trafficking of men, women and children
process. The Greens will continue to defend       across its borders.
media pluralism and independence and free-
dom of the press in the European Union and        The European Union must lead by example in
beyond.                                           its engagement with the rest of the world: this
                                                  implies a new style of foreign policy. It must
The Green New Deal stands for European            devote its energy to solving root causes of in-
values and individual freedoms. All who live      ternational tensions and not just fighting their
here should enjoy freedom of opinion and re-      manifestations. The EU should strengthen
ligious expression within a secular society.      multilateral bodies and international law, fo-
                                                  cus on civilian foreign policy instruments and
Hard-won rights and freedoms must not be          follow the principle of maximum fairness in all
sacrificed in the name of the “fight against      of its external policies, including trade. Euro-
terrorism” or alleged threats to security. The    pean policies must champion peace, democ-
same applies online. The Greens believe           racy and human rights in the world and do so
that digital rights should be on a par with civil consistently and coherently. The EU should
rights. Governments and commercial inter-         also devote more energy and resources to
ests should not have primacy on your priva-       support the international community (particu-
cy. Your data is your business.                   larly the UN) in addressing conflicts that have
                                                  been long overlooked.
Europe has always been a continent of mi-
gration and immigration. A Green New Deal         International cooperation and humanitarian
will deliver a European immigration policy        aid must be a priority. Establishing a Europe-
that provides a fair chance for people who        an Civil Peace Corps ready to make non-mili-
wish to live in the EU. The siege mentality of    tary interventions for humanitarian purposes
‘Fortress Europe’ must not prevail.               would play an important part of this.
Immigration is an opportunity, not a threat.      We want a European Union that fosters de-
We need positive-minded policies that will al-    mocracy and human rights, while promoting
low people to come here legally and efficient-    a pluralistic civil society across the globe.
ly. Immigrants who work in the EU deserve         Human rights must not be sacrificed in
equal rights and equal pay, as well as the        the name of economic interest.
                                                                                    Photo credits:
                                                                                    Stephen Strathree; Georg Winkens

   Delivering a Green New Deal for Europe
The Greens have fought for a sustainable, social and more democratic Europe since our
entry into the European Parliament in 1984. Recognising the need for truly European solu-
tions to European problems, we are the most closely cooperating political family in the Eu-
ropean Parliament. This has helped us punch above our weight and have a much greater
influence on decisions at European level than our numbers would otherwise allow.
  
We believe a Green New Deal is needed to overcome the financial, economic, resource,
energy and climate crises we face. The Green New Deal means massive investments in
sustainable sectors, putting the quality of life first and ensuring the creation of millions of
‘green jobs’.
Realising the Green New Deal means building alliances. We will look for allies in civil so-
ciety, in parliaments and in governments that will work to achieve this change of course.
However, ensuring that Europe gets back on track means getting involved, convincing oth-
ers and voting Green. You can influence what is happening in Europe.
                      Choose a Green New Deal

