THE LABOUR PARTY
EUROPEAN MANIFESTO

CONTENTS
FOREWORD                           3
JOBS AND GROWTH                    5
LIVING STANDARDS                   10
STRONGER, SAFER COMMUNITIES        14
IMMIGRATION THAT WORKS FOR BRITAIN 16
A GLOBAL VOICE                     20
REFORM AND VALUE FOR MONEY         24

FOREWORD
BY ED MILIBAND, LEADER OF THE LABOUR PARTY
More than six years after the financial crisis swept across the world,
the effects are still being felt – and no more so than in Europe. The
focus for Britain at this time should be to promote growth at home and
secure influence abroad.
Our priority is to make Britain better off by dealing with the cost of living crisis and building
an economy that works for hardworking people. Labour MEPs will continue to take action to
tackle the pressures facing families, and make the big long-term changes we need to build an
economy that works for working people.
By contrast, David Cameron’s approach has created unnecessary economic uncertainty
during a cost of living crisis, at the precise time our economy needs stability based on
                                                                                                      3 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
growth and investment. He has committed to a major renegotiation of Britain’s relationship
with Europe, yet he can’t tell us what he is negotiating for, has no strategy for achieving
change and can’t even tell us whether he will campaign to keep Britain in Europe. What he is
guaranteeing is up to four years of damaging uncertainty and division, risking jobs and growth
at home and British influence abroad.
Labour’s position on Europe is clear and principled: we strongly believe Britain’s future lies
at the heart of a reformed EU. The benefits of being in the EU are strategic, economic and
are about the character of our country – an outward looking, confident Britain. But if Britain’s
future in Europe is to be secured, we know that Europe needs to work better for Britain. That
is why Labour is working for change in Europe so that it works for the hardworking people in
Britain.
In addition, Labour believes that the public should have a guarantee that no future transfer of
powers should take place without the public having their say. That is why we have announced
that the next Labour government will legislate for a lock that guarantees that there cannot be
any transfer of powers from Britain to the European Union without an in/out referendum.
Our position offers the British people a clear choice at the next election. A choice between
a divided and ungovernable Conservative Party that threatens to inflict huge uncertainty on
business and undermine Britain’s influence on the international stage or Labour MEPs whose
priority in the European Parliament will be creating more and better jobs; helping British
business succeed; protecting our national interest; and raising living standards for all – not just
the few at the top.

FOREWORD
BY GLENIS WILLMOTT MEP, LEADER OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENTARY LABOUR PARTY
With living standards under pressure, Labour MEPs have put jobs and
economic growth at the heart of our work in Europe, standing up for a
better deal for British families.
We have fought hard to regulate the finance sector, tackling the dangerous risk-taking culture
and big bonuses that contributed to the financial crisis. We have championed new initiatives
to reduce youth unemployment and challenged rip-off credit card charges. We have cracked
down on the underhand marketing of cigarettes to children and stood up to the food industry to
demand more openness about where our food has come from.
Labour MEPs are proud of these and many other successes, but we want to go further. Europe
                                                                                                        4 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
needs to change if it is to win back the confidence of the British public and to better reflect the
issues that matter to hardworking people up and down Britain.
We are proud to have secured new funding to help young unemployed people find a job or
training, but more must be done to reform the EU so that its primary focus is boosting jobs and
economic growth. We are proud of our efforts to block those who seek to weaken the European
safeguards that protect working people and consumers, but there are still loopholes that must be
closed. On trade, we are proud of helping the EU to boost our economy through the European
Single Market and new international trade agreements. But, we must remain vigilant to ensure
that the Government does not use these deals as a tool to undermine our public services,
including the NHS.
And we recognise that at a time of tough choices at home, we must argue not just for restraint of
the EU budget but also for reform. There are further savings and institutional changes that must
be made.
Of course we are also proud of the work we do at home in our constituencies, backing local
projects to support jobs and investment, helping local businesses trade with Europe and
supporting constituents who have had problems dealing with another EU country.
These elections are about who you want on your side representing your interests in the
European Parliament. Time and again Labour has voted for progress to help hardworking Britain.
Yet all too often the Tories have tried to block our efforts, choosing instead to stand up for vested
interests.
From getting the European economy working, to tackling climate change, from equal rights to
the pound in your pocket, decisions made in the European Parliament matter. That is why Britain
is better off with Labour MEPs.

JOBS AND GROWTH
EUROPE FOR YOU
The UK is currently facing a major cost of living crisis - people are finding that their wages are
squeezed and too many of the jobs being created are low paid and insecure. Our economy
has seen the slowest recovery for over 100 years and for millions of people across the
country this is no recovery at all.
Britain deserves better than this.
Labour believes Britain must earn and grow our way to higher living standards for all and
compete in a global market. Building a strong and stable economy is the only way to provide
greater opportunity, jobs, security and to increase prosperity for British people. We are best
placed to do so from a position of influence within a reformed EU.
The economic case for membership is overwhelming.
                                                                             The EU Single Market
                                                                                                      5 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
The EU Single Market is the biggest in the world, opening up
                                                                              is the biggest in the
a 500 million-strong consumer market to UK businesses -
                                                                            world, with 21 million
a market with 21 million companies generating £11 trillion
                                                                            companies generating
in economic activity. Almost half of the UK’s trade and
                                                                                    £11 trillion in
foreign investment comes from the EU, providing around
                                                                                economic activity
3.5 million jobs. And it helps boost the living standards of
people across Britain, encouraging capital and investment to flow into the UK.
Competing in that Single Market with the best companies in the world also drives
competitiveness and innovation for firms in all parts of our economy: from cars to computers,
phones to pharmaceuticals. Exit from the EU would put all these gains at risk. Either we would
end up outside the Single Market or be under terms and rules dictated by others.
We are proud that Labour in government signed up to the Social Chapter which introduced
measures including: minimum four weeks’ paid holiday; a right to parental leave; extended
maternity leave; a new right to request flexible working and the same protection for part-time
workers as full-time workers. Labour will fight to protect these rights.
Our membership of the EU also allows Britain to make considerable economic gains as large
markets open up. For example, recent efforts to secure a transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (TTIP) deal between the EU and US could potentially see an increase in UK
national income of between £4-10 billion annually, or up to £100 billion over a ten-year
period, while opening up transatlantic trade for jobs and growth. And, as a member of the
European Union, Britain also has even greater scope and opportunity to trade with emerging
economies, such as Brazil, India and China.

LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Labour will make long-term changes so that our economy works for working people. That’s
why Labour will cut business rates for small firms, reform our banks so that they work for the
real economy, reform the energy market so that it works for consumers, and introduce a
compulsory jobs guarantee for the long-term unemployed.
EU jobs and growth policy agenda
Labour will work with our allies in Europe to advance a reform agenda which promotes
economic growth and more secure, better paid jobs across the EU. At a time of tough
choices at home, this not only means restraint in the EU budget but also reform. The budget
should focus on those items where spending at an EU level can save money at the national
level, and resources should be shifted from areas such as the Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP) and put into areas of more productive economic development, such as research and
                                                                                                 6 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
development for new technologies and industries.
Labour are proposing a new Commissioner for Growth, bringing together some of the
existing Commission portfolios on economic policy, to help ensure the EU is focused on
growth and held accountable for progress. Alongside this, Labour are proposing that the EU
establish its own equivalent of the UK’s Office for Budget Responsibility with the narrower
mandate of auditing all EU spending decisions based on the impact that they have on
promoting growth and jobs across the EU.
Labour will continue to argue for the completion of the        Labour will continue to
Single Market in digital, energy and services, providing     argue for the completion
potentially huge gains for Britain and helping deliver the   of the Single Market in the
economic recovery that Britain needs. The operation          digital, energy and services,
of the Single Market in existing sectors must also be        providing potentially huge
protected in the face of possible closer integration
                                                             gains for Britain and helping
between Eurozone states.
                                                             deliver the economic
State-aid, research and development, infrastructure          recovery that Britain needs
spending and industry policy are key aspects of an
industrial growth strategy that Europe must make more
effective to help deliver for its Member States. That is why our approach must focus on
how the areas of European policy can be reformed to make them more effective and better
targeted.

Tackling high youth unemployment
Across Europe, there are currently over five million unemployed people under the age of
25 and almost 900,000 of those are living in Britain. Europe needs to get its young people
into work.Labour MEPs stood up for our young people by securing a European youth jobs
guarantee which could initially bring over £160 million to help British young people find
employment.
Promoting trade
Our membership of the EU is a vital platform for agreeing bilateral EU trade deals, providing an
additional engine of growth that will benefit not only the UK, but the EU as a whole.
Labour will continue to support the conclusion of Free Trade Agreements as a means of
promoting economic growth and development. We will also continue to uphold our values,
by ensuring the inclusion of binding and robust human rights clauses where necessary.
                                                                                                    7 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
Labour supports EU-US trade and investment partnership (TTIP), which has the potential to
bring significant benefits to British consumers, workers and businesses. Labour welcomes the
ongoing negotiations on this deal and will continue to monitor its progress, in particular with
regard to the impact the TTIP may have on vital national policies and services, such as the
National Health Service.
European banking reform
Labour will continue to back reforms to big city bonuses by               Labour will continue to
changing rules so bankers’ bonuses are properly controlled.             back reforms to big city
Reforms must deliver a competitive, safe, stable, effective and         bonuses by changing
efficient banking system that operates in a competitive market          rules so bankers’
economy and serves the needs of the real economy, customers             bonuses are properly
and consumers. It must stimulate much-needed economic                   controlled
growth by supporting the credit provision to the economy, in
particular to SMEs and start-ups; it must provide greater resilience against potential financial
crises; and it must restore trust and confidence in banks, which continues to be low.
Tax avoidance
Labour also believes that more can and should be done to tackle tax avoidance. Labour is
backing international efforts to prevent the erosion of tax bases and the shifting of profits,
for example by increasing the transparency of what tax multinationals pay. But multinational
action should not be used as an excuse for delaying reforms – there is more we can
do domestically as well. Labour will extend the successful Disclosure of Tax Avoidance
Schemes regime which we set up in Government, and we will open up tax havens, with the

introduction of requirements to pass on information about money which is hidden behind
front companies or trusts. Labour is in favour of an international financial transaction tax – one
that is agreed by all of the world’s financial centres, including those in the US.
THE TORIES
Since David Cameron and George Osborne came to office,
working people are now on average £1,600 worse off a year.                 David Cameron’s
Yet they gave people earning £150,000 a huge tax cut last year.           approach has created
Hardworking people are finding that their wages are stagnant.             unnecessary economic
Official forecasts show the cost of living crisis will leave with
                                                                          uncertainty during a
working people worse off in 2015 than in 2010. And on tackling this,
                                                                          cost of living crisis
together with growth and the deficit, this Government have failed
every test they set themselves in 2010.
                                                                                                     8 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
The priority for Britain at this time should be to promote growth at home and secure influence
abroad.
By contrast, David Cameron’s approach has created unnecessary economic uncertainty
during a cost of living crisis, at the precise time our economy needs stability based on growth
and investment. By setting a date of 2017 for a referendum on whether we should leave the
European Union, companies around the world have come to the view that this is placing
great uncertainty over decisions to invest in Britain. The CBI described the Government’s plan
as a “diversion” and “distraction” from “the economy, jobs and the cost of living”, while global
companies from Nissan to DHL have openly warned of the dangers of exit.
And further to this, David Cameron has no clarity about what he is negotiating for, no support
from the rest of the European Union for his treaty change and no strategy for achieving it. He
cannot even say whether he would recommend staying in or leaving the European Union.
David Cameron’s promises on Europe are undefined, undeliverable and are now unravelling.
His approach could result in Britain sleepwalking out of the Europe Union instead of reforming
and re-shaping it from within.
Britain deserves better than this.

LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
On growth
  • Labour MEPs campaigned and achieved a real-terms cut in the EU budget at the last
    seven year budget negotiations, calling for it to be more streamlined and focused on
    delivering growth and jobs.
On European banking reform
  • Labour MEPs delivered measures to clamp down on bankers’ bonuses. These include
    measures to cap bonuses at a ratio of 1:1 with salary, or 2:1 with shareholder approval;
    and to defer bonuses so that they are linked to the longer term performance of the bank.
    Conservative MEPs failed to support these measures and George Osborne is still trying to
    stop them with a legal challenge.
                                                                                                9 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
  • Labour MEPs battled against unfettered credit default swaps, against unstable speculation
    in commodities, such as food, and increased transparency for equity and derivatives
    trading.

LIVING STANDARDS
EUROPE FOR YOU
To tackle the cost of living crisis that people are facing across the country, Britain’s access to
and influence in, the world’s largest Single Market is crucial. But so too is a seat at the table to
make sure that, as the Eurozone emerges from an economic crisis, the EU stays focused on
driving up our living standards. Labour will work to ensure that the EU does more to focus on
tackling the cost of living crisis facing British families by:
   1. Tackling insecurity at work by banning zero-hours contracts when they are exploitative
      and campaigning against David Cameron’s repatriation of social rights
   2. Tackling rising energy bills and climate change by reforming the European single market
      in energy
   3. Prioritising transport through infrastructure development and protection of consumer
                                                                                                       10 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
      rights
The impact of the EU on people’s lives extends beyond simply the impact on creating jobs.
The social market combines sustainable economic growth with protections around people’s
working conditions. This brings good quality jobs, equal opportunities and social protection
for all.
It was a Labour Government that helped introduce sensible measures at an EU level that
protect the rights of British workers. These are measures to which we are committed and
which we will fight to protect.
LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Tackling low pay and job insecurity
Labour will stop the race to the bottom on wages and conditions between EU workers and
local workers. We will take action to ensure the minimum wage is properly enforced, close
the legal loopholes in rules for agency workers and look at EU directives designed to prevent
undercutting to make sure they are effective.
The next Labour Government will increase the fines for non-payment of the National
Minimum Wage to £50,000 to provide a proper deterrent and give local government a role
in enforcement. We will change the Minimum Wage regulations to stop employers providing
overcrowded and unsuitable accommodation and offsetting it against workers’ pay. Labour
will work with British business and others to stop the loophole in the Agency Workers
Directive being used to undercut the pay of non-agency staff, and we will ensure Directives
like the Posted Workers Directive are effective.

And Labour will take the fight against exploitative zero-hour contracts to the EU pushing for
legislation to stamp out the unfair practices and abuses associated with these contracts. We
will ban employers from being able to require zero-hours workers to be available on the off-
chance that they will be needed; stop employees from being required to work exclusively for
one firm if they are on a zero-hours contract; and ban the use of zero-hours contracts when
employees are in practice working regular hours.
We will also defend your existing protections and standards at work, such as the right to a
minimum of four weeks’ paid leave and the right not to be sacked for being pregnant.
Tackling the cost of living crisis through enhancing consumer rights
At home, Labour will help people facing a cost of living crisis by freezing energy prices until
January 2017 and expanding free childcare for working parents. And we have called for a tax
cut for 24 million working people on middle and lower incomes by introducing a lower 10p
                                                                                                      11 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
starting rate of tax.
The energy market does not work for ordinary families                        Labour’s energy price
and Labour will change that. Labour’s energy price freeze
                                                                                freeze will save on
will save, on average, £120 each year for 27 million
                                                                               average £120 each
households and help 2.4 million businesses. Our
                                                                                year for 27 million
plans to reset the market will deliver fairer prices in the
                                                                            households along with
future. Working in Europe Labour MEPs will tackle the
                                                                            2.4 million businesses
cost of living crisis by ensuring that EU competition
policies benefit consumers, particularly when it comes to energy.
Labour will also tackle the crisis in living standards by pursuing investment in European
transport infrastructure and extending and defending consumer rights. For European
competitiveness, economic development and sustainability, investment in European transport
infrastructure is essential to securing a balanced economic recovery.
Protecting the NHS
This Government has deliberately tried to expose the NHS to the full force of EU competition
law. The next Labour Government and our MEPs will work to make sure the NHS is protected
from that body of law, so that patients are always put first.

THE TORIES
While Labour will tackle the cost of living crisis, standing up for the hard-working majority,
David Cameron and the Conservatives are more focused on standing up for the privileged
few than improving living standards for all.
David Cameron’s approach to Europe today doesn’t just risk jeopardising the prospects for
growth in our economy, it also risks unravelling the fabric of rights and protections that are
such a crucial part of what defines the standards and quality of life that so many today depend
upon.
David Cameron has long cited social and employment law as one of the areas where he
wants to see the EU do less, and the UK potentially opt out. Yet he has not set out the extent
of the impact on British jobs, British employees and British companies and he has not said
                                                                                                      12 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
that equivalent domestic legislation will be introduced immediately to ensure that these
valuable protections are maintained. Labour knows this would be hugely damaging for the
vital employment protections and rights that we currently enjoy in our country.
Instead of tackling job insecurity in the UK, this Tory-led Government has made it easier to
fire people by doubling the period an employee is required to work for a firm before they
can file an unfair dismissal claim and by introducing charges for those who take their case
to tribunal. Downing Street even toyed with the call from Tory donor Adrian Beecroft to give
small businesses the power to fire at will – a proposal that could have affected more than
3.6 million private sector workers and which was only dropped when it was rejected by the
business community.
David Cameron is out of touch over the rising cost of             A Conservative Government
energy bills. Since he became Prime Minister, the average       after 2015 would be dominated
annual energy bill has risen by £300. He has failed to          not by trying to tackle the cost of
stand up to the energy companies and his claim to lead          living crisis, protect the National
the greenest government ever are in ruins. The Tories           Health Service or getting jobs
have failed on renewable energy, with investment in clean
                                                                for our young people, but by an
energy halved on David Cameron’s watch, costing jobs
                                                                all-consuming and damaging
and threatening our energy security.
                                                                obsession with whether we
A Conservative government after 2015 would be                   should leave the European
dominated not by trying to tackle the cost of living crisis,    Union
protect the National Health Service or getting jobs for our
young people, but by an all-consuming and damaging obsession with whether we should
leave the European Union.
Britain deserves better than this.

LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
Standing up for families
  • Labour MEPs tackled the cost of living by delivering cuts to mobile phone call and data
     costs to protect British families from rip-off prices when using a mobile phone abroad.
  • Labour MEPs voted to make unfair credit card charges illegal. Thanks to these changes,
     from this year onwards, British consumers will be protected against sky-high credit card
     transaction fees.
  • Labour MEPs moved to protect savers against losing everything by backing a new
     deposit guarantee to provide compensation for depositors if their bank goes bust.
  • Labour MEPs voted to introduce clear food labelling - including labelling on which
                                                                                                 13 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
     country our food comes from - against opposition from Government Ministers.
  • Labour MEPs took on the big tobacco industry in order to protect children from
     aggressive marketing by backing new rules to introduce graphic warnings covering 75
     per cent of cigarette packaging; a ban on chocolate, strawberry and menthol flavoured
     cigarettes a ban on slim cigarettes; and calls for better regulation of e-cigarettes.
Championing energy security
  • Labour MEPs backed reforms to the EU’s Carbon Market to protect our environment and
     get a better deal for British industry.
  • Labour MEPs backed reforms to the European Emissions Trading scheme which would
     have allowed intervention in the auctioning timetable of carbon permits to try to restore
     the price of carbon following its collapse caused by the economic crisis.

STRONGER, SAFER COMMUNITIES
EUROPE FOR YOU
From fraud and human trafficking, to narcotics and terrorism, we know that the nature of
crime is changing. In an era of increasingly integrated markets and greater ease of travel,
crime is no longer confined to state lines and can spread to threaten our own national
security. We need a capable and cooperative Europe to help make Britain’s streets safer and
our borders more secure.
Labour wants to see stronger, safer communities which is why we will never relinquish
Britain’s power over our criminal justice system. Yet the transnational nature of crime today
reinforces the fact that we cannot fight these global challenges alone. We depend on our
European partners for intelligence and operational support in order to protect the British
public and the freedoms which they enjoy. Labour is committed to improving the EU’s
effectiveness to ensure that these goals are realised.
                                                                                                    14 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Cross-border crime is growing. And criminals can travel between countries more easily
than ever before. That’s why Labour supports a proper framework for police forces to work
together across borders. Over 4,000 suspected criminals have been sent back to other
EU countries to face justice – over 90 per cent were foreign citizens. The European Arrest
Warrant has led to the successful extradition of one of the 21/7 bombers from Italy so they
can face justice back in the UK.
We also believe its right that if people want to come to this          We believe co-operation
country, they abide by our laws. So Labour will consult on           with our European partners
lowering the sentence threshold for EU migrants who commit
                                                                     on crime and intelligence
crimes having only recently arrived in the UK, so that, for
                                                                     is vital to making Britain’s
example, a migrant who committed common assault or
                                                                     streets safer
robbery within a few months of arriving would be automatically
considered for deportation.

THE TORIES
This Tory-led Government is taking policing backwards, cutting          With the loss of 15,000
or privatising core functions and putting neighbourhood policing
                                                                       officers, 999 response times
at risk. With the loss of 15,000 officers, 999 response times have
                                                                       have increased and victims
increased and victims are waiting longer for help at the time
                                                                       are waiting longer for help
when they are most afraid. 14,000 more violent criminals got
away without charge and 9,000 more got off with no conviction
last year with victims denied the vital justice they deserve.
The Government is also putting at risk Britain’s ability to fight cross-border crimes, such as
trafficking, online child pornography and terrorism here in Britain. By threatening to withdraw
from crucial pan-European measures such as the European Arrest Warrant - which provides
a vital legal process to stop people fleeing justice and to ensure that those responsible for
                                                                                                      15 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
crimes are held accountable - the Government is putting national security at risk.
Britain deserves better than this.
LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
  • Labour MEPs were crucial in supporting a European victims’ rights package that offers
     advice and practical support to UK victims and their families - especially when they have
     been caught up in the aftermath of a crime and serious injury abroad - so that people
     are not left to simply fend for themselves under what are often incredibly traumatic
     conditions.
  • In the next Parliament, Labour MEPs will support a law which seeks to clamp down on
     cross-border money laundering.

IMMIGRATION THAT WORKS FOR BRITAIN
EUROPE FOR YOU
Britain has benefited greatly from the contributions of immigrants welcomed to our shores
over many centuries. British people greatly value the ability to move around Europe, with
over two million of our own citizens estimated to live in other EU countries. And immigration
brings benefits to our country, making it richer, economically, socially, culturally.
But there is a genuine concern about the impact that the pace of change has had here,
especially about a race to the bottom in wages and working conditions between migrant
workers and workers already here. And because immigration is so important it needs to be
made to work for all, not just for some.
Labour’s approach to immigration has changed under Ed                   Labour believes that
Miliband’s leadership and we have learned the lessons of              immigration needs to be
                                                                                                     16 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
the past. We will take action to better manage the pace of            properly controlled and the
immigration, reform our economy to be less reliant on low
                                                                      impact of immigration needs
skilled migrant labour, and do more to help migrants integrate
                                                                      to be fair for all
into our society so they can play their part.
LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Labour believes that immigration needs to be properly controlled and the impact of
immigration needs to be fair for all.
Controlling the impact of future enlargement
Labour has learned the lessons from past East European migration. We will ensure maximum
transitional controls to place restrictions on workers from any future countries joining the EU.
Immigration will be controlled, with people counted in and out at the border. We will do
more to cut illegal immigration, with tougher action including the reinstatement of fingerprint
checks at the border and closing down loopholes that enable people to exploit short-term
student visitor visas. We are also committed to working within the EU to give Member States
more flexibility over the transitional arrangements that they sign up to – including significantly
lengthening the maximum permitted period of transition beyond the current seven years.
Fair rules
Labour is proud of Britain’s diversity and believes it is something to be celebrated. But at the
same time as celebrating what is good about diversity, One Nation Labour recognises that the
pace of change in some communities has generated anxieties, which need to be confronted,
not dismissed.
In particular, we need fair rules and clear expectations of those who come here to contribute

to Britain. Rights must be matched by responsibilities. In particular, everyone coming to live
in Britain should speak English, or learn to speak English as a first step to integrating into our
society. No-one living here should be excluded from the mainstream of society and the world
of work by being unable to speak the language. With Labour, all public sector workers who
work directly with the public will have to be able to speak English to a decent standard and
we will encourage local authorities to prioritise English language learning rather than written
translation materials.
Action is also needed to deal with the impact of immigration on the welfare system and
public services. British people recognise that most people who come to Britain from the
EU work hard and contribute more in taxes than they use in public services or claim in
benefits. However, they also want the system to be fair. For example, they don’t believe that
people newly arrived should have exactly the same rights as people who have contributed
throughout their lives. So Labour would look at increasing the period for which people have
                                                                                                       17 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
to be present in the UK before they can claim unemployment benefits from three months to
six months. And we would pursue reforms in Europe so that child tax credit and child benefit
are no longer paid to families living abroad.
Preventing a race to the bottom on wages and conditions
We know that as a result of low skilled migration, some of those         We would ensure that the
in low paid work have seen downward pressure on wages.                 law on the minimum wage
The availability of cheap labour from abroad has been                  is properly enforced, raising
exploited by some employers who have sought to get round               the fines for employers
minimum wage laws by offsetting people’s wages against their           found to be breaching it
accommodation. There are also examples of employers using
                                                                       from £5,000 to £50,000.
recruitment agencies to recruit directly from abroad, with local
                                                                       We would ban recruitment
workers frozen out. Exploitation like this is wrong; bad for those
                                                                       agencies from hiring solely
who are exploited, bad for other local workers who end up
                                                                       from abroad. Jobs must be
being undercut and bad for responsible businesses that play by
the rules.
                                                                       open to all qualified to do
                                                                       them
There are a series of things we would do straight away here in
Britain. We would ensure that the law on the minimum wage is properly enforced, raising
the fines for employers found to be breaching it from £5,000 to £50,000. We would ban
recruitment agencies from hiring solely from abroad. Jobs must be open to all qualified to do
them. We would extend the remit of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority so that they could
remove licenses from employers exploiting workers in other sectors of our economy where
there is abuse. And we would close loopholes in rules for agency workers which allow wages
to be unfairly undercut.

Ultimately we want clearer, stronger laws so businesses know where they stand and
responsible employers know they won’t be undercut, but so that it is clear that employers
who use pressure or force to exploit people and get round employment law are committing
a crime. That is why Labour will consult on the case for strengthening the laws around
exploitation and the undercutting of wages and jobs.
THE TORIES
There are practical measures the Government could be taking right now to address people’s
concerns about immigration, yet instead the Tories are choosing to engage in divisive and
cheap gimmicks. They prefer to send out ill-judged ad-vans than taking the basic steps
necessary to tackle illegal immigration.
David Cameron promised to get immigration down, but he is failing. Net migration is up, and
                                                                                                 18 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
his target is in tatters. And the focus on net migration isn’t
just failing on its own terms: it counts British people leaving     Under David Cameron’s
the country as a success and has focused on reducing              leadership, border controls
the wrong types of immigration. Top business visas are            have been reduced,
being delayed and university students – together with the
                                                                  electronic checks have been
billions they bring in investment – have been put off from
                                                                  delayed and more people
applying to study in our higher education institutions by this
                                                                  are absconding
Government’s approach. Meanwhile, the problem of illegal
migration, which isn’t covered in the net migration figures,
has been getting worse.
Under David Cameron’s leadership, border controls have been reduced, electronic checks
have been delayed and more people are absconding. Fewer foreign criminals are being sent
home and the number of people here illegally is growing.
David Cameron has also failed to take action to prevent exploitation of migrant workers,
which leaves workers here undercut. Only two firms have had prosecutions brought against
them for not paying the minimum wage since 2010.
And while the new Schengen Information System will share information on migrants travelling
within the EU and guarantee the authenticity of documents and help identify illegal residents,
so far the Home Secretary is refusing to sign up.
Britain deserves better than this.

LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
 • Labour MEPs and the last Labour Government strengthened rights for agency workers to
   help protect the living standards of Britain’s families, but there is still work to do. There is
   a loophole in the laws around Britain’s interpretation of the European agency rules which
   allows firms to avoid paying agency workers at the same rates as directly-employed staff.
   Labour MEPs will work with the next Labour government and with British business to
   close this loophole and ensure that agency workers cannot be used to undercut non-
   agency staff.
 • Labour’s MEPs have campaigned for tough new laws, so that no firm across Europe can
   use your personal data to ‘blacklist’ or prevent you from working, just because they don’t
   like your views or activities.
                                                                                                      19 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO

A GLOBAL VOICE
EUROPE FOR YOU
In a globalised world, where common threats permeate national              Membership of the EU
borders, global challenges need global solutions and the European        also gives us the power
Union acts as a power multiplier for Britain. Being part of the          of collective action and
biggest Single Market in the world brings not just trade and jobs,
                                                                         pooled resources that help
but gives us a better chance of partnering with major powers
                                                                         make Britain safer and more
and tackling global issues, from climate change to security.
                                                                         secure
Membership of the EU gives us the power of collective action and
pooled resources that help make Britain safer and more secure –
whether through tackling environmental challenges, targeted EU sanctions on Iran and Russia,
or EU neighbourhood funds to help counter the spread of extremism.
Some of the most striking sights of this year have been the pictures of young Ukrainians
                                                                                                       20 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
waving the EU flag. For them Europe is an ideal: a symbol of a better future, of peace and
prosperity. This was the original case for the European Union: securing peace among the
countries of Western Europe as they emerged from the horrors of the Second World War.
Today, the EU continues to foster peace and prosperity worldwide. Multilateral action taken
in response to the Arab Spring aimed to promote political participation, dignity, freedom
and employment opportunities for affected populations. In the Western Balkans, the EU is
supporting economic and political reforms as countries move closer to EU membership.
The EU is also vital for Britain’s national security and defence. While NATO remains the
primary forum for our military cooperation, bilateral defence agreements with our European
partners are becoming increasingly important. For example, Britain’s Defence and Security
Co-operation Treaties with France, signed in 2010, have enabled us to undertake joint action
in conflicts in Libya and Mali in recent years. The EU is also providing vital resources to tackle
piracy in several Eastern and Southern African countries.
The size, geographical reach and partnership dimension of the EU’s development programme
makes it a formidable global development actor. Between 2004 and 2009, EU aid helped
enrol more than nine million children in primary education, vaccinate five and-a-half million
children against measles, and connect more than 31 million people to clean water across the
world. EU development assistance also increases the UK’s international impact. The money
Britain channels through the EU encourages other European countries to raise their spending
on development, maximising the impact of our contribution. The EU also has a presence in
over 130 countries which allows the UK to reach places, particularly fragile states and post-
conflict situations, where the Department for International Development is not currently
operating on the ground.

LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Labour has always been an internationalist party. In today’s world, the UK’s influence can be
maximised by working with partners and the EU is crucial to achieving UK foreign policy goals
that are central to our national security. We recognise that the strategic opportunities are
changing but the constraints endure — the finite nature of our military capacity and the need
to continually renew our bilateral and multilateral relationships with key players around the
world. Being a part of Europe can help us to overcome some of these constraints.
The increased interconnectivity of the world will bring challenges. Some we can predict
– climate change, growing pressure on resources and the ongoing threat of conflict and
instability. Some we cannot. But what will not change is the responsibility that we all have
towards our fellow citizens – whether they live in rich, poor or middle-income countries. It is
clear that the impacts of conflict or environmental damage will affect us all. We must work
                                                                                                      21 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
together and share the responsibility for meeting those challenges. A Labour approach is
rooted in notions of global solidarity and justice, framed by our commitment to partnership
and cooperation, and it is underpinned by mutual accountability – ours to the world and the
world’s to us. This is where the real British national interest lies – in helping to create a world
that reflects the best of our values.
Britain will always retain an active and independent foreign           Britain will always retain
policy, but Labour believes we can enhance our influence in
                                                                     an active and independent
the world by engaging with our European partners to forge
                                                                     foreign policy, but Labour
common positions where we share a common approach.
                                                                     believes we can enhance
The European External Action Service (EEAS) has already had
                                                                     our influence in the world by
some successes: Baroness Catherine Ashton and her officials
have successfully mediated between Serbia and Kosovo, and
                                                                     engaging with our European
have worked to secure an interim agreement on Iran’s nuclear
                                                                     partners to forge common
programme while negotiating on a more comprehensive                  positions where we share a
agreement together with the Six Powers. In Burma, the EEAS           common approach
has helped to persuade the regime to embrace reform and in
Somalia the EEAS has successfully co-ordinated the EU naval operation against piracy.
Ending extreme poverty
Given that the European Union is the world’s largest provider of development aid, we will
work to ensure that every single pound of taxpayers’ money will deliver the maximum
value for money and impact. Labour has pressed other European countries to fulfil their
promises to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and will work to ensure maximum
European support for robust, new Sustainable Development Goals and the future post-2015
development framework.

Enhanced defence cooperation
Labour will seek to enhance our defence cooperation with allies in Europe where it is in our
interests to do so, but we will not support the creation of a European Army. We do, however,
recognise that it is in Britain’s interest for sovereign forces from European countries to engage
in joint EU missions for peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance, in full coordination with
NATO. And we will continue to lead the way in tackling global poverty, making sure that
everyone has an equal chance in life.
Tackling climate change
Europe has been leading the fight globally in tackling climate change: it has led the drive to
build a low carbon economy and has been creating green jobs thanks to the commitments
agreed with our partners in Europe under a Labour Government. This is a vital new industry
                                                                                                    22 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
for our economy and we will work within the EU to ensure Britain benefits from research and
development of good quality green jobs in this area. Continued leadership within Europe to
tackle climate change remains vital to protect our environment for generations to come.
THE TORIES
David Cameron is putting party interest before national interest. His weak leadership has led
him to concede to those on the eurosceptic right of the Conservative Party, and he now risks
sleepwalking Britain out of the European Union and the power we gain from being a part of it.
David Cameron’s approach has undermined our leverage and political capital in Europe at
a time when our voice could be most significant. It has also caused our allies and trading
partners concern over our future in Europe.
NATO, the G7 and the G20, the Commonwealth, the United Nations Security Council and
the EU are not mutually exclusive power bases that we have to choose between. They are
overlapping and interdependent spheres of influence. Should the UK withdraw from the EU,
our influence will wane in other spheres too.

LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
Human trafficking
  • Labour MEPs secured new EU wide laws which for the first time introduced legally
    binding sanctions and criminal penalties against human trafficking.
Arms trade
  • Labour MEPs led the European Parliament ratification of the International Arms
    Trade Treaty, first proposed by Labour in Government. The Treaty has the potential to
    significantly boost efforts to stem the flow of arms to some of the world’s most volatile
    places. Labour will continue to show international leadership, and ensure a progressive
    interpretation of the Treaty and its measures.
                                                                                                23 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
Environment
  • Labour MEPs delivered an overhaul of European fishing rules including a new ban on
    throwing unwanted fish back into the sea.
Tackling corruption through rules on transparency of extractive industries
  • Labour MEPs took on the big extractive industries and drafted new rules to tackle
    bribery and corruption in European oil, mining, gas and logging companies. The Labour-
    drafted transparency reforms will ensure local communities can benefit from the natural
    resources in their country by making those companies disclose the payments they make
    to foreign governments to secure access to natural resources.

REFORM AND VALUE FOR MONEY
MAKING EUROPE WORK FOR YOU
While the initial shock of the financial crisis which swept across        Labour’s reforms will
Europe seems to be subsiding, the EU continues to face                  re-focus the EU on the
enormous challenges. These must be addressed and European               core priority of economic
institutions must be reformed to be more effective and better           stability and job creation
suited to meet the needs of its Member States, including the UK.
Labour has a robust European reform agenda which seeks to achieve this.
Firstly, in some areas the EU needs to re-focus on where it adds both value and capacity.
That’s why Labour’s reforms will work to ensure the EU is focused on the core priority of
economic stability and job creation. Reforming Europe so that it delivers on growth is vital for
Britain’s ability to tackle the crisis in household living standards.
                                                                                                      24 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
Secondly, Labour will work to achieve changes that help maximise British influence over
reform in the EU to make it work better for Britain.
Through full and active engagement with our European allies we can ensure that the EU
becomes more effective and more accountable to its citizens.
Britain’s national interest lies in remaining at the heart of the EU. Therefore Labour will deliver
reform from within the EU, not exit from it.
LABOUR’S PRIORITIES
Value for money
Labour will seek ways to make the European Parliament and Commission more streamlined
and effective.
Labour will continue to campaign for the wasteful second seat of the European Parliament in
Strasbourg to be scrapped. Labour believes we can bring down the cost of the Parliament and
reform the Commission to help it operate more effectively as well as reforming how the EU
spends its money and how Britain gets best value.
Deliver better British influence
Labour is calling for national parliaments to have more of a say over the making of new
EU legislation. Currently the ‘yellow card’ system – which the Lisbon Treaty initiated – gives
national parliaments the ability to push legislation into review if there is significant opposition
to it from a third of member states. Labour is looking at extending this to form a collective
emergency brake procedure – a ‘red card’ system - that could further amplify the voice of
national parliaments within the EU law making process.

As well as reforming how the EU takes decisions, Labour is also calling for improvements to
the scrutiny system in the House of Commons to allow MPs the opportunity for intervention
at an earlier stage in the EU’s policy making process. These changes would enhance the
quality and legitimacy of EU legislation.
Legal lock
There are no proposals for a further transfer of powers to               the next Labour
Brussels. But given the uncertainty about the future of Eurozone       Government will legislate for
integration, the British people know that although it’s unlikely, it   a lock that ensures no future
remains possible.                                                      Government can transfer
Therefore the next Labour Government will legislate for a lock         powers to Brussels without
that ensures no future Government can transfer powers to               the explicit consent of the
Brussels without the explicit consent of the British people.           British people
                                                                                                       25 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
This would not just be a referendum on the narrow question
of whether to allow a transfer of powers from Britain to Brussels; as we have seen in other
countries, such votes are too easily ignored. This position, setting out the conditions in the
next Parliament under which a Labour Government would hold an in/out referendum, offers
the British people a clear choice at the next election.
THE TORIES
When it comes to the reform which European institutions so need, David Cameron seems
incapable of addressing this task in a serious and sensible way due to his fear of his own
backbenchers.
Before becoming Prime Minister, David Cameron acknowledged his party had to stop
“banging on” about Europe. However, the same old Tories have re-emerged and the gap
between the minimum the Tory backbenchers will demand on Europe and the maximum our
European partners can accept remains unbridgeable.
David Cameron’s submission to those who seek European impotence, combined with the
consistent alliance between Conservative MEPs and vested interests, shows the Tories are
not prepared to make the big changes and long-term decisions required to help families
across Britain.

In these difficult times, isolation and cutting ourselves off from our European allies is not the
answer.
Unlike David Cameron who walked away from the main centre-right party group in the
European Parliament, reducing Britain’s influence in Europe and leaving him isolated from the
mainstream, Labour will work with our European partners to deliver real and effective reform
from within the EU.
Britain deserves better than this.
LABOUR MEPS FIGHTING FOR YOU IN EUROPE
British influence and value for money
  • Labour MEPs supported restraint in EU annual and long-term budgets.
                                                                                                    26 EUROPEAN MANIFESTO
  • Labour MEPs back the scrapping of the Strasbourg Parliament.
  • Labour MEPs backed more transparency in meetings of EU Ministers and for national
     parliaments to play a stronger role in the making of new EU rules.
  • Labour MEPs have also supported changes to the European Parliament to make sure
     votes are more transparent and the expenses system for MEPs is reformed.

0000_14 Promoted by Iain McNicol, General Secretary, the Labour Party, on behalf of the
Labour Party, One Brewer’s Green, London SW1H 0RH. Printed by Xxxx

