In Europe, in work
The Liberal Democrat manifesto for the 2014 European Parliament
elections
Liberal Democrats want Britain to stay in the EU because we are fighting
for a stronger economy — millions of British jobs are linked to our trade
with the EU
                                    1

Applicability:
This manifesto contains Federal
Liberal Democrat policy. On issues
where power is devolved in Scotland
and Wales, the policy of the Scottish
and Welsh Liberal Democrats applies.
                                     2

Contents
       1. Introduction
       2. Jobs: In Europe, in work
       3. Crime and justice: Fighting cross-border crime, defending
          your rights abroad
       4. The environment: Protecting the environment and creating
          green growth
       5. The financial system: Building a stronger and fairer economy
       6. Consumer rights: A better, fairer deal for consumers
       7. Agriculture, rural development and fisheries: A more
          sustainable future for rural communities and businesses
       8. Europe and the world: Stronger together in a changing world
       9. European Union membership and reform: Yes to European
          Union membership, yes to reform
      10. Fairness and opportunity: Promoting people, education and
          free movement
      11. The Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
                                    3

On 22 May, your choice is simple: do you think Britain is better off in
Europe or do you want us out of it? Will you back a party that will lead us
towards the exit, or do you want your representatives to make sure
Britain remains engaged with our neighbours – a leading nation in our
European backyard?
I want you to choose the Liberal Democrats because we are now
Britain’s only party of IN. We want Britain to stay in Europe – because
that is how we keep our country strong, prosperous, safe and green.
•   As members of the European Union, our businesses have access to
    500 million European customers. Trade with other European
    countries supports millions of British jobs.
•   As members of the European Union, Britain is part of a global
    economic superpower. We have far greater influence as part of a
    powerful, 28-member bloc.
•   As members of the European Union our police can work with their
    counterparts abroad to crack down on the criminals who cross our
    borders. Collectively, our governments can be much bolder in the
    fight against climate change too.
Over the coming weeks you will hear other parties blame all of Britain’s
problems on Brussels. It’s certainly true that the EU’s institutions are not
perfect – just as Westminster isn’t – and across these pages you’ll find
details of the ways in which we want to reform them. But don’t be fooled:
being in Europe is good for Britain. Leaving the EU is the surest way to
trash our economic recovery. Pulling up the drawbridge would leave our
nation isolated and diminished in the world. Now is the time to use your
voice to protect Britain’s interests.
On 22 May, vote for the Liberal Democrats.
Nick Clegg
                                      4

Jobs:
In Europe, in work
Millions of British jobs are linked to our trade with other European
countries and being in the European Union gives us more strength to
negotiate trade deals with global players like the US, China, India and
Brazil, opening up huge opportunities to British business.
Global competition is quickening at a time when the UK and Europe
have been weakened by a severe economic and social crisis. We want
to respond to this challenge not by looking inward but by working with
the rest of the European Union to create millions more jobs. We can do
this by removing barriers to trade for British companies, slashing red
tape for small businesses, securing funding for innovation and
competitiveness, and by using the EU's collective strength to promote
trade with the rest of the world.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved for jobs
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament have supported
    valuable free trade agreements with emerging economies around
    the globe such as South Korea. Since the South Korea agreement
    alone, British exports to that country have more than doubled to
    almost £5 billion.
• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament helped secure an
    exemption for over 100,000 British businesses from complicated
    accounting rules, saving small businesses administrative costs of
    up to £390 million a year.
•   Liberal Democrats helped cut the European Union budget by £30
    billion while securing over £60 billion in EU-wide funding, including
    around £2 billion earmarked for small businesses, to support research
    and technology in universities and companies. Past UK recipients
    include Manchester University for the development of graphene – ‘the
    wonder material of the 21st century’ with a huge range of uses from
    electronics to neurosurgery – plus a further £23m from EU regional
    aid to build the world’s leading centre of graphene research.
                                       5

• Liberal Democrats were instrumental in the establishment of the
  single European Union patent, a system which means British
  inventors now only need to register their product once to protect it
  across the European Union from intellectual property theft, rather
  than 28 times, saving entrepreneurs up to £20,000 per patent and
  protecting jobs.
• Liberal Democrats helped push through new legislation designed to
  reduce the number of days needed to set up a new small
  business, cut start-up costs, and establish a one-stop shop for
  business start-ups.
• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament supported funding that
  will invest £8 billion across all regions of the UK in tackling youth
  unemployment, re-training, investment in science and manufacturing,
  the tourism industry and small businesses. Previous funding schemes
  have helped create over 200,000 new jobs and supported over
  200,000 small businesses in the UK.
• Liberal Democrats supported a much-needed boost for British
  infrastructure through a £17.5 billion EU-wide investment that will
  fund upgrades in our rail network and develop our energy supply,
  creating thousands of jobs in the process.
How Liberal Democrats in Europe want to create more jobs
More jobs from trade within Europe
•  The European Union’s single market already provides benefits
   each year of up to £1225 per British citizen. Now we need to
   remove the remaining trade barriers and fully open up this huge
   market of 500 million customers to British businesses, which will
   help the UK and the whole of Europe.
•  Liberal Democrats want to open up the EU’s online industries, energy
   market and services – such as accountancy, law and architecture
   where the UK has a competitive edge – creating opportunities for
   UK firms to expand trade and create jobs.
•  Liberal Democrats support more co-ordinated European transport
   to ensure that technical or other trade barriers do not hinder goods
   moving between the UK and the rest of the European Union. We will
                                      6

   campaign for the removal of barriers which prevent British companies
   from entering the rail, air and shipping markets in other EU countries.
More jobs from trade with worldwide markets
•  The UK benefits hugely from negotiating as part of the European
   Union which, taken together, is the world's largest economy and
   trading bloc and is vital to opening new markets for UK exports of
   goods and services.
•  Progress is finally being made in global multilateral trade
   negotiations that could significantly help the poorest countries in the
   world as well as developed economies like ours. Liberal Democrats
   support efforts to give them even more impetus through the
   European Union’s combined negotiating strength. We achieve more
   within the World Trade Organisation and other international bodies as
   full members of the EU with the combined strength of 500 million
   people than with just the UK’s 65 million. We will push for global
   reductions in price-distorting export subsidies and tariffs that unfairly
   disadvantage developing economies’ exports.
•  Liberal Democrats back European Union trade negotiations with
   emerging economies such as India and the MERCOSUR countries
   of Latin America as well as with other developed economies. We
   strongly support the trade and investment negotiations with the USA,
   which could be worth up to £10 billion extra to the UK economy each
   year, and the EU-Japan trade agreement, which could increase UK
   GDP by £5 billion a year, with each deal creating thousands of jobs.
   The Liberal Democrats will work to ensure that environmental, health
   and safety standards are maintained in all trade negotiations.
Cutting red tape and ‘thinking small’
•  Small and medium sized businesses are the greatest job creators in
   the UK economy, providing two-thirds of all private sector jobs.
   Liberal Democrats will prioritise creating greater opportunities for
   small and medium sized businesses in the European Union,
   including promoting measures to improve access to European
   funding.
•  We will support the consistent application of the ‘Think Small First’
   principle to reduce unnecessary European Union regulatory costs,
                                      7

  which particularly hit smaller businesses. We will demand effective
  impact assessments before new proposals come forward and
  exempt smaller businesses from legislation where appropriate.
• Liberal Democrats will back representation for small and
  medium-sized businesses at all European Union negotiations when
  organisations representing employers and workers agree legislative
  and policy proposals.
• Smaller German businesses export far more than their UK
  counterparts – both within the single European market and around
  the world. To help our small businesses exploit the advantages of the
  European Union, Liberal Democrats will promote an easy-to-use EU
  information portal for small firms with access to EU and other
  export-related information, to ensure all British firms know how to
  take advantage of the single market.
• We want more trade initiatives promoted by UK Trade and
  Investment (UKTI) and UK embassies in other European Union
  states, such as for the low-carbon and environmental sectors in
  which the UK is strong, specifically designed to enable smaller firms
  to meet potential buyers or partners – a low-cost but more ambitious
  role.
Combining fairness with flexibility
• Liberal Democrats support European Union employment legislation
  that upholds fairness and necessary protection of workers,
  whilst recognising the need for global competitiveness.
• We will work towards amending the Working Time Directive to
  remove unintended consequences, so that the Directive is not unduly
  burdensome, especially for small firms, doctors and hospitals, while
  guaranteeing workers reasonable holidays and rest breaks. We will
  defend the opt-out of the 48-hour working week limit applied by the
  UK and 15 other EU countries.
                                    8

Promoting innovation in science and manufacturing
The promotion of UK leadership in the EU market for knowledge,
research and innovation is crucial to UK success in global economic
competition, where the pace of change quickens every year.
•   We will work hard to ensure that UK universities and companies
    continue to be successful in obtaining European Union research
    funding by seizing the opportunities of £60 billion of European
    Union funding which supports research and technology.
•   Liberal Democrats will support European Union-wide rules for the
    production of low emission vehicles, exploiting the UK’s
    competitive advantage in world markets. This will reinvigorate UK
    ‘green’ manufacturing, create jobs and strengthen the UK economy
    by decreasing our reliance on oil and ultimately save money for the
    consumer.
Getting British ideas to market faster
   European Union research and development funding is designed to
   bridge the gap between research and the market, turning British
   inventions and technological breakthroughs into products with
   real commercial potential for UK firms.
• Liberal Democrats want greater access to capital and support for
   smaller businesses to transform research achievements into
   market successes – a market-driven approach creating partnerships
   of private sector organisations and member states to bring together
   the resources needed.
Supporting project bonds for vital infrastructure
•   Liberal Democrats will support the European Investment Bank (EIB)
    initiative to develop European project bonds in order to speed up
    vital infrastructure development and benefit the UK’s financial
    services industry. This will harness the EIB's ability to fund lending at
    lower rates, create less reliance on banks and generate greater use
    of capital markets. It will enable the development of newer sources of
    energy and energy grids and the improvement of broadband
    networks, which are currently constrained by lack of capital,
    stimulating sustainable jobs and growth across the UK.
                                        9

Crime and justice:
Fighting cross-border crime, defending your rights abroad
Crime doesn't stop at borders. Criminal gangs, drug smugglers and
human traffickers cross borders so Liberal Democrats believe that law
enforcement must cross borders too. British police need European Union
crime-fighting organisations such as Europol which helps coordinate the
fight against cross-border criminal gangs and smashed the world’s
largest online paedophile network, rescuing 28 vulnerable children in the
UK. The European Arrest Warrant was used to bring failed 21 July
London bomber Hussain Osman back to the UK from Italy in only 2
months to face justice. Prior to the EAW, such an extradition could have
taken years. We want greater co-operation to fight more crime; less
co-operation will only benefit criminals.
When you’re abroad, we want your basic civil liberties to travel with you.
Liberal Democrats want to ensure that if you are a victim of crime or if
you are arrested in another EU country, you enjoy the same minimum
advice, legal rights and standards of treatment as you would in the UK.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved:
•   Liberal Democrats in the Coalition successfully ensured that the UK
    Government committed to stay part of Europol and keep the
    European Arrest Warrant, despite opposition from many
    Conservatives and UKIP. The European Arrest Warrant has been
    used to put criminals behind bars, bringing hundreds of rapists,
    murderers and paedophiles back to the UK to face justice, and
    deporting over four thousand criminal suspects back to their own
    countries.
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament have secured
    European Union funding for missing child alert systems, enabling
    the widespread introduction of missing child hotlines.
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament successfully
    campaigned for new European Union laws to crack down on
    human traffickers by making sentencing tougher and improving EU
    police cooperation.
                                     10

•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament supported new rules
   that will guarantee British victims of crime in other EU countries
   access to victim support services free of charge.
•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament backed new laws,
   which guarantee basic rights such as the right to good quality
   English language interpretation and legal advice for British
   citizens arrested in other EU countries.
•  Liberal Democrats in the coalition government support UK legislation
   for a proportionality test and we are pushing for this to be
   implemented across the European Union to ensure that the
   European Arrest Warrant is not used for petty crimes and minor
   offences and so that it can be refused where there is a possibility that
   a defendant’s rights could be violated.
How Liberal Democrats want to fight more crime and protect your
rights
Fighting more crime
 • Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament will press for a
   European Union missing child alert system to be implemented fast
   to ensure that an EU-wide effort is co-ordinated and carried out with
   immediate effect when a child goes missing.
 • We will support measures to combat cross-border fraud,
   corruption and tax evasion. Liberal Democrats welcome the
   European Commission’s new proposal on fighting money laundering
   and will work to secure its speedy implementation.
 • Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament agree with the UK
   Missing Persons Bureau that a European Union database of
   unidentified bodies should be set up to help families searching for
   missing loved ones.
 • Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament will support the work
   of the new European Cyber Crime Centre (EC3), which is based
   within Europol to help coordinate our defences with our European
   partners against the increasing number of cyber-attacks that threaten
   our security.
                                     11

 • Liberal Democrats want the worldwide protection of children
   online to be a priority for the European Union and will back
   continued engagement with business and organisations active online
   to promote self-regulation and action to protect children and young
   users of the internet.
 • Liberal Democrats will work to extend the European Union’s criminal
   record information system (ECRIS) so that our police have better
   information about potential suspects, while respecting individuals’
   privacy, irrespective of their nationality.
Upholding your rights
•  We support UK participation in further measures to ensure that if they
   are caught up in criminal proceedings in other EU countries, Britons
   get fair treatment and a fair trial.
•  Liberal Democrats support the European Arrest Warrant as an
   essential crime-fighting tool – but it has to be used proportionately.
   We support its use for the arrest and conviction of suspects, not
   simply to interview individuals as witnesses.
•  Liberal Democrats support the full implementation of ‘Eurobail’ to
   allow British citizens who have been arrested in another
   European country to serve their bail back in the UK rather than
   having to face lengthy pre-trial detention abroad, as was the case for
   Andrew Symeou who was detained in Greece for two years before
   being proved innocent.
•  Liberal Democrats want the UK to re-join the European Union system
   of transfer of non-custodial sentences such as probation, so that
   British citizens serving community sentences in other countries
   can be transferred back to the UK to complete their sentence.
Strengthening the rule of law
•  Countries have to meet strict criteria on the rule of law, democratic
   processes and civil liberties before becoming a member of the
   European Union. This has helped remarkable transitions from
                                      12

  dictatorship to democracy in Spain, Portugal, Greece and the
  former communist countries of eastern Europe.
• Liberal Democrats want a stronger system for ensuring that member
  states maintain high standards in the rule of law, human rights
  and democracy after they join the European Union.
                                 13

The environment:
Protecting the environment and creating green growth
Climate change and environmental degradation come at a huge
economic and social cost – but tackling them represents a huge
business opportunity. Investments in green technology in China and the
US already outstrip those in Europe. Liberal Democrats recognise that
being part of the European Union gives us a much bigger market for
British ‘clean tech’ exports, and a bigger pool of resources to invest in
research and innovation. Ambitious EU environmental targets will benefit
the UK by bringing more green growth and green jobs.
Tackling climate change and protecting the environment are
longstanding Liberal Democrat priorities. We were the first major UK
party to call for a legally binding international climate change treaty. And
because pollution shows no respect for national boundaries, we want to
do even more to work with our European neighbours to protect the seas,
rivers, countryside and atmosphere. And when Europe sets strong
environmental standards for the rest of the world to follow, it gives our
green businesses a competitive advantage on the world stage as well.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament and in the coalition
    government have been instrumental in agreeing new standards on
    energy efficiency. These will unlock investments in energy saving
    technologies, secure dramatic reductions in energy waste and
    reduce energy bills.
•   At a time of rising fuel bills, Liberal Democrats in the European
    Parliament have helped to introduce ambitious fuel efficiency
    standards for cars and vans. These will reduce oil imports and
    save money for individuals and businesses alike.
•   Liberal Democrat Minister Ed Davey has been leading European
    governments in promoting a 40% reduction target for greenhouse
    gas emissions in the European Union by 2030, in the face of tough
    opposition from less environmentally-concerned parties.
                                        14

•  Thanks to the Lib Dems in the coalition government, the UK is now
   world leading in terms of attracting investment for offshore wind,
   second for biomass and fifth globally for renewables overall.
•  Liberal Democrats supported the creation of the European Union’s
   Emissions Trading Scheme for greenhouses gases, the biggest of its
   kind in the world and vital for encouraging business to combat
   climate change and generate low carbon growth.
•  Liberal Democrats backed the strong European Union position in
   world climate change talks, first establishing the Kyoto Protocol and
   then in 2011 a remarkable global commitment to agree a new
   climate treaty, including every country in the world.
•  Liberal Democrats strongly backed the European Union’s measures
   to keep illegal timber out of the international trade – helping to
   reduce global deforestation, fighting climate change and ensuring
   poor countries benefit from sustainable forest management.
How Liberal Democrats want the European Union to do even more
to protect the environment
Creating more green jobs
•  The renewable energy sector now employs three times as many
   people as the UK coal industry and could create around 200,000
   new jobs over the next decade.
•  At a time of austerity, Liberal Democrats will work for European
   Union investment in low-carbon solutions to be used more
   efficiently with better understanding and more effective use of the
   money already available, in particular EU structural funds for energy
   efficiency.
•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament will push for more
   international grid connections between European countries,
   including Britain and France, to ensure we can meet our climate
   change goals faster and at a lower cost. A European SuperGrid
   would bring the UK lower bills and better value from its renewable
   resources by more efficiently sharing energy resources, standby
   reserves and variable power sources like wind.
                                     15

More ambitious climate change and energy policy
• The need to combat climate change is more urgent than ever.
  Liberal Democrats believe the European Union should follow the
  UK’s lead in its long-term climate change policy and reduce
  greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2030. This will give
  long-term certainty to investors in low-carbon technologies,
  encourage industrial innovation and give Europe much greater clout
  in the global climate change negotiations scheduled to conclude in
  2015.
• The European Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS), the first
  and biggest carbon market in the world, urgently needs reform.
  Liberal Democrats want an urgent strengthening of the ETS
  mechanism, with increased flexibility to respond to economic change
  and deal with the current excess of carbon allowances, sending a
  consistent, strong, and positive message to investors.
• Liberal Democrats will continue to support ambitious energy
  efficiency policy at European level as it is key to sustainability,
  competitiveness and energy security. Studies show that the
  biggest cost-effective potential lies with buildings. We will therefore
  support future EU policies that will make our homes greener,
  warmer and cheaper to heat.
• Liberal Democrats will push for better European energy labelling
  to encourage the production and sale of more efficient appliances.
  We also want to introduce tighter emissions standards for cars
  and vans to cut CO2, reduce reliance on imported oil and put money
  back into drivers' pockets.
• We will continue to support the development of carbon capture and
  storage technology to make clean use of fossil fuels like coal and to
  reduce emissions from industrial processes such as cement
  manufacture.
                                     16

 More renewable energy
•  Renewable energy is the UK’s biggest national energy resource, and
   has already brought over 35,000 jobs to the UK economy, many in
   areas of high unemployment. Efficient exploitation of offshore wind
   requires co-operation and co-ordination with other North Sea
   countries. Liberal Democrats want to see a positive, stable
   long-term European policy supporting the development and
   deployment of renewables to maximise opportunities for UK
   investors, British businesses in the supply chain and green jobs.
•  Liberal Democrats want to encourage the research and production of
   truly sustainable biofuels such as those created from grasses or
   waste. The current subsidies for transport biofuels produced from
   crops that compete with food production (‘first generation’ biofuels
   such as palm oil) push up global food prices and drive deforestation
   and should not continue beyond 2020.
More protection for the natural environment
•  World-wide, economies and human well-being depend critically on
   the health of the natural environment; the costs of biodiversity loss
   and ecosystem damage are estimated to reach 18 per cent of global
   economic output by 2050. Liberal Democrats support the revision of
   EU development policies to support the international goal of at least
   halving the rate of loss of all natural habitats by 2020.
•  Europe imports commodities from overseas such as timber, palm oil,
   metals, minerals and fossil fuels, which can cause significant
   environmental destruction in their countries of production. Liberal
   Democrats want to encourage sustainable consumption in
   European Union member states, for example by improving resource
   efficiency and using public procurement policies and other
   measures to source sustainable commodities.
•  We will argue for the European Union to support the target of halting
   net deforestation worldwide by 2020 and to draw up an action plan
   on agriculture, deforestation and trade. We will also push for more
   effective action to combat the widespread illegal trade in wildlife, fish
                                    17

  and timber, including plugging the loopholes in the EU Timber
  Regulation.
• The European Union and its countries – led by Britain – provide
  significant aid to developing countries. Liberal Democrats want the
  European Union to withdraw development aid for environmentally
  harmful technologies and invest more in clean energy generation.
  This will support UK green business and meet existing international
  commitments to help poorer nations with climate change mitigation
  and adaptation.
                                   18

The financial system:
Building a stronger and fairer economy
The recent financial crisis affected every country in Europe, large and
small, rich and poor. While the Coalition Government in the UK has had
to take the tough decisions needed to build a safer financial system and
a stronger economy at home, the crisis also showed that financial
instability crosses borders. We need the Euro-zone to take some tough
decisions. We need common rules across Europe to tackle the problems
within the wider financial system, rather than 28 different national
responses.
Liberal Democrats believe that sustainable prosperity will always be at
risk without a stable financial system and that the UK should show the
way as a global leader in financial services – a position that can only be
maintained while we remain part of the European Union. The challenges
ahead are to ensure stability and to maximise the potential of our
financial sector to create jobs and growth across the UK. We also need
to achieve greater fairness in taxation, particularly when it comes to
large multinationals that should not take advantage of cross-border tax
loopholes and avoid paying tax in countries where they are making large
profits.
 What Liberal Democrats have already achieved
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament led by Sharon Bowles
    MEP (chair of the Parliament’s influential Economic and Monetary
    Committee) have been instrumental in creating new rules, which are
    making banks and other financial industries safer by restricting risky
    practices, and ensuring they hold more money in reserves so that
    they, rather than the taxpayer, cover their losses should problems
    arise.
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament helped push through
    reforms that will help small businesses gain crucial loans from
    banks as well as raise money from specific small business stock
    markets and venture capital funds.
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament successfully
    campaigned for the introduction of new tax transparency for
                                      19

  multinationals, including banks and extractive industries, to show
  how much tax they pay in different countries. This will help to ensure
  that businesses pay their way in poorer but resource-rich countries.
• New rules on bankers’ bonuses, pushed by Liberal Democrats in
  the European Parliament, have been introduced which will restrict the
  potential for huge payoffs for failed bankers. No more rewards for
  failure.
• Nearly 50% of the UK’s trade is with the rest of the European Union
  and our banks have exposures of £268 billion to Euro-zone countries.
  Liberal Democrats have been at the forefront of efforts to pass new
  rules to stabilise the Euro-zone to prevent a future crisis which
  could threaten the British economy.
How Liberal Democrats want to build a safer, stronger financial
system
Creating a safer financial system
• Liberal Democrats will continue to work to create a safer financial
  sector and ensure better quality of regulation in order to protect the
  economy, businesses and jobs.
Making finance work for jobs and growth
• In the UK, our businesses are too reliant on banks, which provide
  80% of lending for small and medium-sized companies. This has had
  a serious effect on business financing and the creation of jobs as
  companies have struggled to secure lending from banks crippled by
  the economic crisis. Liberal Democrats will support alternatives to
  short term bank financing for small and medium sized
  companies through long term funding designed to provide stable and
  secure business lending.
                                     20

Tax justice
• Multinational companies should operate on a level playing field with
  local businesses by paying their fair share of taxes. Liberal
  Democrats will continue to press at European and international level
  for new rules that will force large companies to pay fair taxes to the
  countries in which they operate. Action at only the national level
  cannot tackle this international problem.
Fairer banking
• Liberal Democrats are working to secure clear and understandable
  EU-wide information documents explaining the associated risks and
  costs when buying a wide-range of financial products such as life
  insurance.
• Liberal Democrats are fighting for fairer rules that will clamp down
  on manipulation of energy and financial markets as exposed by
  the LIBOR scandal and Brent Oil fixing investigation, ensuring fairer
  mortgage repayments and fuel prices for consumers.
• Under European Union rules, transfers of money between bank
  accounts in different Euro-zone countries do not face any transaction
  charges. Liberal Democrats will campaign to extend this system to
  the UK and other non-Euro-zone European countries which will help
  British citizens, including those living in other EU countries who
  want to send money to and receive money from the UK, such as
  students, British citizens working abroad and retired family-members.
Helping our neighbours stabilise the Euro
• Liberal Democrats are committed to help stabilise the Euro and
  ensure that it succeeds. The UK’s economic recovery relies on a
  stable and prosperous Euro-zone.
• Liberal Democrats believe it will not be in the British national
  interest to join the Euro in the foreseeable future.
                                     21

Consumer rights:
A better, fairer deal for consumers
Consumer protection is a cornerstone of the European Union single
market. Businesses benefit from a single set of reliable rules across 28
countries. Consumers have reaped huge benefits from cheaper goods
and services, more choice, higher protection for rail and air travellers
and cheaper mobile phone charges when abroad.
Liberal Democrats are committed to improving consumer protection
across the European Union further – something we could never
guarantee if we left. We want British citizens to enjoy the same high
standards of protection whether they buy goods from Sheffield or
Stockholm and whether they travel to Blackpool or Benidorm.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved:
•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament, in the face of UKIP
   opposition, have helped secure an 80% reduction since 2007 in
   call, SMS and data charges on your mobile phone when travelling
   in other EU countries. Data roaming alone is 91% cheaper than in
   2007.
•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament were instrumental in
   securing new laws that ended hidden holiday charges and ensure
   that the full price is clear from the outset when you book flights or
   holidays online, that you have a right to a refund within 14 days and
   that you aren’t hit with excessive charges when using a credit card.
•  Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament campaigned alongside
   the UK charity Guide Dogs for the introduction of alert systems on
   electric vehicles to keep blind people safe on the road by ensuring
   that these near-silent vehicles create a noise which allows the blind
   and visually impaired to hear them approaching.
•  Liberal Democrats have successfully safeguarded the European
   Union’s ‘Safer Internet’ programme, which works with the industry to
   promote a safer online environment for internet users by raising
   public awareness, fighting illegal content and tackling harmful conduct
                                       22

   online while spreading knowledge about internet safety across
   Europe.
•  Liberal Democrats supported reforms of European Union tobacco
   rules that will introduce mandatory health warnings on 65% of the
   surface of packages of cigarettes and rolling tobacco.
How Liberal Democrats want to make your consumer rights even
stronger
Ending the roaming rip-off altogether
•  Liberal Democrats will campaign to abolish mobile phone roaming
   charges once and for all so that when you go on holiday in Europe,
   you will be able to call friends and family or search the Internet for no
   more than you are charged in the UK.
Protecting you when you go on holiday
•  Liberal Democrats support greater protection of holidaymakers’ rights
   to compensation if your holiday company goes bust or if the
   holiday they provide doesn’t live up to expectations.
•  Liberal Democrats will work to ensure that you are fully protected
   when you fly by introducing measures that mean airlines will no
   longer be able to avoid paying out compensation through excuses like
   mechanical problems that could have been prevented and are obliged
   to explain to passengers why they are being delayed more than half
   an hour, putting an end to uncertain and frustrating waits sitting on the
   runway or in the departure lounge.
Keeping consumers healthy
•  The horsemeat scandal has shown there is an urgent need for higher
   standards of food inspections across the European Union. The
   Liberal Democrats will support better country of origin food labelling,
   the publication of inspection reports and ratings and EU-wide alerts
   where there are cases of suspected malpractice.
                                      23

Easier compensation
• At the moment it is difficult for consumers to gain adequate
  compensation when people suffer losses due to malpractice, such
  as when JJB Sports were guilty of fixing the price of replica England
  shirts sold to consumers. We will support new rules that will make it
  easier for consumers to take cases together, reduce the number of
  court cases and cut costs for the claimants.
Better consumer protection online
• Liberal Democrats will push for the European Union to take a lead in
  worldwide co-ordinated action to tackle issues relating to online
  gambling such as tax avoidance, match fixing, money laundering
  and under-age participation.
Better protection for animals
• Liberal Democrats will support the introduction of a new
  comprehensive animal welfare law to promote the highest possible
  standards of animal welfare across the European Union. This would
  address wildlife trafficking into the European Union, and establish
  minimum standards on the breeding and sale of cats and dogs.
                                      24

Agriculture, rural development and fisheries:
A more sustainable future for rural communities and businesses
The natural wealth of our countryside provides for us and is vital to our
future growth and wellbeing. The total value of such natural resources to
the UK economy was nearly £35 billion in 2011. Yet this is threatened by
climate change, which has led to increasing pressure on water resources
across Europe. By 2007, at least 11% of Europe’s population and 17%
of its territory had been affected by water scarcity. The World Economic
Forum highlights water security as one of the top five risks for business
leaders over the next 10 years, threatening jobs and livelihoods.
Liberal Democrats believe comprehensive and sustainable policies are
needed in order to address these problems. We endorse support for
rural communities and businesses specifically in order to protect the
natural environment and enhance biodiversity, landscape and heritage,
water management and local economic activity including tourism.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved
•    Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament have strongly backed
     reform of the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy.
     More than half of Common Agricultural Policy funds will now be
     directed towards environmental services and tackling climate
     change. Both farmers and national governments will have to focus
     on more sustainable land management. Overall, the Common
     Agricultural Policy used to account for 75% of the European Union
     budget. In 2012, it was just 41%. Farm support has been
     rationalised across the European Union, phasing out almost all
     historical or production payments. Environmental enhancement by
     farmers will now be mandatory.
•    Liberal Democrats delivered reform of the Common Fisheries
     Policy, which will rebuild fish stocks, put an end to discards, devolve
     day-to-day decision making to regional bodies involving fishermen
     and scientists, and ensure that Europe has a sustainable fishing
     policy for the future, which will enable fishing communities in the UK
     to thrive.
                                        25

• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament have successfully
  negotiated changes to EU rules on everything from lorry heights
  to quad bikes that would have burdened rural businesses with
  unreasonable costs. And we secured exemptions for small livestock
  trailers and fast tractors from MOT tests.
• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament delivered rules for an
  improved and more cost-efficient meat hygiene inspection
  system, balancing the desire to ensure a high standard of food
  quality with the need to protect the farming community from unduly
  burdensome regulation.
How Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament want to do
more for rural communities
More reform of the Common Agricultural Policy
• Liberal Democrats want continued reform of the Common Agricultural
  Policy, eliminating the remaining production and export subsidies and
  developing new ways to ensure environmentally sustainable
  solutions to the growing demand for food. We want more devolution
  in agricultural policy, ensuring continued support for rural
  communities, particularly upland and less favoured areas, and a
  mid-term review in 2017.
• We want to protect funding for research into sustainable food
  production, climate change and water management and for it to
  be transferred to the European Union’s research programme.
• Liberal Democrats will push for more flexibility and a much wider
  menu of environmental options, and for more research into a more
  sustainable model of agriculture, which could improve water and
  soil management through payment for environmental services.
                                    26

A more sustainable fishing industry
•  Liberal Democrats want to see a more sustainable fishing industry
   in the UK both for fishing communities and for our future food
   supplies. The recovery of fish stocks is a priority. European Marine
   Sites protect some of Europe’s most important marine and coastal
   habitats and important European species. They should be expanded
   across the European Union in line with the current UK Marine
   Conservation Zones, first established in 2010.
•  Liberal Democrats support a 100% ban on the discard of edible
   and other usable fish.
•  The UK should assess the appropriate distribution of fishing
   opportunities between large scale and small-scale operators.
•  Liberal Democrats want tougher enforcement of European Union
   fishing rules by all member states, with UK inspectors encouraged
   to play a full role in the European Fishing Control Agency, and ensure
   the EU regulations designed to curb the import of products from
   illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing activities are fully
   enforced.
                                     27

Europe and the world:
Stronger together in a changing world
The world is changing fast. Economic power is shifting. Countries such
as China, India and Brazil are taking their place on the world stage.
Economic competition will get tougher, and rising powers will push for
greater political recognition. The United States, guarantor of European
security since the Second World War, is increasingly turning its attention
and resources to Asia.
The globalisation of technology, trade, people and ideas continues to
make the world a smaller place. The fall-out from instability in far-flung
corners of the world can quickly affect us at home. Increasingly, the
world will feel the effects of environmental degradation and climate
change and the poorest will be hit hardest.
If European countries like Britain are to be heard in this turbulent world
of economic and political giants, they must act together far more
effectively using the European Union’s full military, diplomatic, economic,
and developmental potential. Liberal Democrats believe that the
European Union can champion security, freedom and democracy in our
foreign, defence and security policy, alongside the UN, NATO and our
key partnerships with allies such as the United States and France.
Concerted European action can make a difference and, when it speaks
with one voice, the European Union can be a powerful force for good in
the world.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved
•   Liberal Democrats emphasised the need for a strong and united
    European Union response to Russia over the crisis in Ukraine
    including long-term plans to reduce Europe’s use of Russian energy
•   Liberal Democrats strongly supported the European role in brokering
    landmark deals between Serbia and Kosovo, and with Iran over
    its controversial nuclear programme.
•   Liberal Democrats campaigned for an end to human rights abuses
    in Burma and backed European Union sanctions, which have led to
    fundamental political reforms.
                                      28

• Liberal Democrats have supported the European Union in bringing
  greater security to Africa, including successful missions in Sudan
  and Mali.
• Liberal Democrats strongly supported the EU’s Atalanta naval task
  force, which is now fighting piracy off Somalia under British
  command, protecting trade and bringing greater safety and security
  to the high seas.
• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament supported the
  development of European aid to some of the poorest and most
  vulnerable people in more than 100 countries. Europe now
  allocates up to £1.2 billion a year to water, sanitation and hygiene
  projects alone, saving millions of lives.
• Liberal Democrats in the coalition government in the UK have set an
  example to other member states by meeting the long-standing
  target of spending 0.7% of gross national income on
  development assistance.
• Liberal Democrats have paved the way for sanctions against
  individuals working for oppressive regimes to prevent them
  benefiting from health, leisure and investment services in the
  European Union.
• Liberal Democrats want all women to enjoy a life free from violence.
  Lib Dem Minister Lynne Featherstone has pushed the issue of
  female genital mutilation to the top of the Government’s agenda here
  in the UK while Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament have
  helped to deliver over £6.5 million of European Union funding to
  help tackle female genital mutilation. Our voice in the EU is
  making people take notice of violence against women all over the
  world.
                                    29

How Liberal Democrats would help to build a safer and more
democratic world
•  Liberal Democrats believe that the promotion of human rights and
   democracy should be the common thread at the heart of European
   foreign policy.
•  Liberal Democrats want to see a more effective European Union
   foreign policy, building more security and democracy in Europe’s
   neighbourhood through strong common positions, and better
   strategy and coordination.
•  Liberal Democrats believe that deeper defence co-operation is vital
   if European powers are to retain significant military capabilities. The
   European Defence Agency, in co-operation with NATO, should play a
   central role in helping states to pool and share military capabilities.
   The UK Parliament should always have the final say on the British
   use of force.
•  Liberal Democrats support further enlargement of the European
   Union to candidate countries. Membership of the European Union
   continues to hold out the best hope of lasting peace and stability in
   the Western Balkans. All candidate countries, including Turkey, must
   meet stringent conditions, including strengthening democracy and
   human rights before gaining membership. There should be
   appropriate transitional arrangements for all new member states.
•  Liberal Democrats believe that the European Union must do more to
   build a firm and effective common policy on Russia, emphasising
   human rights and developing common energy policies to avoid
   overdependence. We should work together to encourage China to
   play a responsible role in world affairs, as well as strengthening
   economic and trading ties.
Development assistance
 • Liberal Democrats will press for all EU policies that affect the
   poorest countries in the world, including trade and agriculture, to
   take account of development priorities.
 • Liberal Democrats believe the European Union can do even more to
   avoid costly duplication, for instance by providing key infrastructure
                                     30

  projects which are difficult for member states to support individually,
  such as the building of roads in developing countries. We want the
  EU to work with developing countries to share expertise and
  funding on issues that affect whole regions such as migration,
  security, infrastructure development and trade.
• Liberal Democrats want all information about all European aid to
  meet the International Aid Transparency Initiative standard.
• Development must focus on fairness and the public good, not just
  economic growth. Liberal Democrats will press for European
  development assistance to uphold the rights of the poorest and
  most vulnerable groups like women and girls, older people and
  those with disabilities; to recognize environmental threats like
  climate change, pollution and the loss of biodiversity; and to
  encourage common approaches to medical diagnosis, information
  and treatment in developing countries, helping to protect us all from
  global pandemics.
                                    31

European Union membership and reform:
Yes to European Union membership, yes to reform
Liberal Democrats support giving the British people the opportunity to
vote on European Union membership through an ‘in’ or ‘out’ referendum
in the event of proposals for any further significant transfer of powers
from the UK to the European Union.
Liberal Democrats will campaign for an ‘in’ vote because it is
overwhelmingly in Britain’s national interest to stay in and pursue
the policies on jobs, crime and the environment outlined in this
manifesto.
Liberal Democrats believe the European Union needs reform, just as the
British political system needs reform. The European Union needs to
focus on those issues which cut across national boundaries and where
countries need to work together to succeed. Reform must be for the
whole European Union, not just for Britain’s unilateral interest. Liberal
Democrat Members of the European Parliament and our ministers and
Members of Parliament in Westminster will continue to campaign to
make the European Union more efficient and accountable, and to
maximise British influence across Europe.
Our position is straightforward: yes to membership of the European
Union; yes to reform; yes to an in/out referendum.
What Liberal Democrats have already achieved
•   Liberal Democrats are proud of their excellent track record and
    reputation in the European Parliament, recognised by the Daily Mail
    as the “hardest working British party”.
• At a time of austerity across Europe, Liberal Democrats helped push
    through the first ever reduction in the European Union budget by
    £30 billion. Liberal Democrat Members of the European Parliament
    have also worked hard to cut parliamentarians’ expenses, including
    travel allowances for elected Members of the European Parliament,
    and reduce staff numbers across the European Union institutions.
• Liberal Democrats in the coalition government have commissioned a
    groundbreaking review of the powers of the European Union.
    This review has highlighted specific areas where EU rules could be
    re-visited such as the application of the working time directive to the
                                      32

  NHS while demonstrating that in many cases the balance of powers is
  broadly right and of huge benefit to the UK, such as with the EU
  single market.
• Liberal Democrat Members of the European Parliament were
  instrumental in securing important new safeguards that mean Euro-
  zone banking rules that affect the UK will have to be approved by the
  UK and other countries outside the Euro-zone.
• Liberal Democrats in the coalition government and in the European
  Parliament successfully campaigned for devolving the day to day
  running of fishing policy to advisory councils, allowing for a crucial
  say to those working in the fishing industry, scientists and other
  expert stakeholders.
How Liberal Democrats will reform the European Union and give
people their say
An In/Out referendum
• Liberal Democrats in the Coalition Government supported the
  European Union Act 2011, which will ensure that, in the event of
  proposals for any further significant transfer of powers from the
  UK to the EU, there will be a referendum.
• Liberal Democrats want this referendum to be an in or out
  referendum, giving every British citizen a say on British membership
  of the European Union.
• Liberal Democrats will campaign strongly for the UK to remain in
  the European Union when that referendum comes. Staying in the
  European Union is the best way forward for British jobs, fighting
  cross-border crime, protecting the environment, championing
  consumer rights and for Britain’s standing and influence in the world.
Cutting waste
• Liberal Democrats will continue to campaign to bring an end to the
  wasteful travel between the European Parliament cities of
  Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg required by the present Treaty.
  This will save £150m and almost 20,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions
  annually.
                                    33

•  We want to build on the savings already achieved and push for
   further reductions in European Union administrative costs
   including through cuts to travel and transport budgets.
•  Liberal Democrats support an audit of existing European Union
   agencies and institutions to find ways to rationalise and collaborate
   over back-office functions in order to find savings including the
   abolition of the Economic and Social Committee.
Protecting the UK’s influence in the single market
•  As the Euro-zone countries plan changes in their relationship through
   the planned Banking Union, we must protect British influence in
   single market decision-making, which could affect thousands of
   British companies and millions of British jobs. We can only do this as
   a full member of the European Union.
•  Liberal Democrats will call for a guarantee in the next European
   Union treaty that member states both inside and outside the Euro-
   zone have a full voice in the regulation and application of the single
   market.
Strengthening scrutiny at Westminster
•  National parliaments should play a greater role in scrutinising
   European Union rules. Liberal Democrats want reform to ensure
   better co-ordination of scrutiny by national parliaments and
   establish stronger links between chairs of national parliamentary and
   departmental committees and the European Parliament.
•  We support reform of the House of Commons scrutiny system to
   ensure that Members of Parliament hold government ministers
   better to account for the decisions they take in Brussels. We support
   the introduction of regular European Union question times, for
   ministers to report back to MPs both before and after Council
   meetings and for expert House of Commons select committees to
   lead the scrutiny of European legislation in their specialist areas.
•  We believe the Prime Minister should make a statement to the House
   of Commons setting out the objectives of the government before
                                     34

  each European Council meeting, giving British MPs a chance to
  influence the position taken by the British government in Europe.
Promoting British talent in Brussels
• The UK has a poor record at getting British citizens recruited into the
  institutions of the European Union, and is currently the most
  underrepresented of any country. Less than 5% of European
  Commission staff come from the UK despite the fact that we have
  over 12% of the European Union’s population. Liberal Democrats
  strongly support more active encouragement of potential UK
  candidates, as well as better training, particularly in foreign
  languages, mentoring and networking for UK candidates in European
  Union recruitment processes.
                                   35

Fairness and opportunity:
Promoting people, education and free movement
Because the United Kingdom is a member of the European Union,
British citizens have unparalleled opportunities to live, study, train and
work abroad. The UK’s economic future lies in developing the potential
of its young people and Liberal Democrats believe it is crucial to cultivate
the skills of our young to learn foreign languages and gain work
experience in other countries.
As many as 2.2 million British citizens already live in other EU countries
– from students in Prague to retirees in Spain to young families in
France. Our economy benefits greatly from the contribution of citizens
from other countries of the European Union working in the UK and we
want to attract the best and brightest people to the UK.
What Liberal Democrats have achieved already
•   Liberal Democrats have defended the European Convention on
    Human Rights and the European Union Charter of Fundamental
    Rights against attempts to undermine these important standards of
    human rights across Europe by right-wing opponents.
•   Liberal Democrat Members of the European Parliament have backed
    full implementation of European Union law which bans
    discrimination against women in the workplace. We are
    campaigning against unequal pay and for better representation of
    women in Europe’s boardrooms.
•   Liberal Democrats in the coalition government led the fight for equal
    marriage in the UK. Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament
    have supported equal marriage across Europe, as well as calling for
    the mutual recognition of marriages and civil partnerships between
    different EU countries.
•   Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament supported the
    expansion of the Erasmus programme, which allows students to study
    and train abroad and which will enable thousands more British
    students to study in other EU countries in the coming years.
                                      36

• Liberal Democrats in the European Parliament fought for the
  introduction of a Masters Degree loan guarantee scheme, which will
  enable British students to take out low-interest loans of up to £15,000
  to undertake postgraduate research studies across the
  European Union.
How the Liberal Democrats will support fairness and opportunity
Equality and non-discrimination
• Liberal Democrats will continue to support equal opportunities for all,
  reject anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and all forms of racism and
  xenophobia. We will continue to work towards better representation
  of women and ethnic minorities in both the public and private sectors.
• Liberal Democrats will keep campaigning against homophobia and
  discrimination against LGBTI people throughout Europe and the
  world. We continue to urge all European Union countries to offer
  asylum to those fleeing persecution because of their sexuality or
  gender identity.
Improving skills and encouraging aspiration
• Young people in the UK take far less advantage of European Union
  schemes for studying and working abroad than other EU countries.
  Liberal Democrats will encourage government and universities to fully
  publicise the opportunities available and encourage uptake from
  British students.
• Liberal Democrats will encourage learning and skills by
  campaigning for periods spent learning in another EU country, for
  example under the new Erasmus+ scheme, to count as time served in
  apprenticeship.
• We want to see the British government capitalise on funding available
  to give students and young people more opportunities. We want
  to see the number of vocational students able to spend part of their
  education and training abroad and teachers, trainers and youth
  workers receiving funding to teach or train abroad double in the
  2013-2020 period.
                                   37

Encouraging Free and Fair Movement
• Liberal Democrats will continue to support the right to free
  movement across the European Union, which is a fundamental
  part of the EU single market. Free movement has brought huge
  benefits to British citizens and to the British economy. Migrants into
  the UK from other EU countries are estimated to have contributed
  34% more in taxes than they receive in benefits or public services.
• We support fair rules to underpin free movement. Liberal
  Democrats have worked hard in government to ensure that the
  benefits system is not abused by anyone, wherever they come
  from. We support the coalition government’s plans to strengthen the
  Habitual Residence Test, as well as the proposal to support an EU
  framework to extend the period from three to six months that an EU
  citizen coming to the UK to look for work would have to rely on the
  benefits system of their home country as would British citizens
  looking for work in another EU country. This will help ensure that the
  cost of job seeking claimants falls on the country of origin rather than
  the country where they are looking for work.
• There is currently a lack of information about the nationality of people
  claiming benefits in the UK, which has fuelled an uninformed debate.
  Liberal Democrats support the inclusion of a nationality box in the
  Universal Credit claiming form so that the government can produce
  comprehensive statistics.
• The UK’s tourism and service industries are losing out on valuable
  income from non-EU tourists because they often opt to only purchase
  the visa that only gives them access to the 26 European countries
  which are part of the Schengen Agreement, but not to the UK. Liberal
  Democrats believe that the high standards of pre-entry checks should
  not be compromised but we would ask the UK Visas and Immigration
  to create a streamlined, fast track process for those applicants that
  have already been issued a Schengen visa.
                                     38

The Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
The Liberal Democrats are working to create a stronger economy and a
fairer society in the UK. We are also members of the Alliance of Liberals
and Democrats for Europe, an international family of liberal political
parties that is working for reform and democracy in the European
Parliament and across Europe. Unlike some other British parties who
have cut their European links, Liberal Democrats believe in promoting
British influence by working together with like-minded friends across the
continent, including a dozen parties in government in their respective
countries.
Neos – Das Neue Österreich
Austria
Mouvement Réformateur
Belgium
Open Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten
Belgium
Partei für Freiheit und Fortschritt
Belgium
Dvizhenie za prava i svobodi
Bulgaria
Nacionalno dviženie za stabilnost i văzhod
Bulgaria
Hrvatska narodna stranka - Liberalni demokrati
Croatia
Hrvatska socijalno liberalna stranka
Croatia
Istarski demokratski sabor/Dieta democratica istriana
Croatia
                                     39

Det Radikale Venstre
Denmark
Venstre Danmarks Liberale Parti
Denmark
Eesti Keskerakond
Estonia
Eesti Reformierakond
Estonia
Centern
Finland
Suomen Keskusta
Finland
Svenska folkpartiet i Finland/Suomen ruotsalainen kansanpuolue
Finland
Freie Demokratische Partei
Germany
Drassi
Greece
Fianna Fáil
Ireland
Italia dei Valori
Italy
Radicali italiani
Italy
Darbo Partija
Lithuania
                                  40

Liberalų ir centro sąjunga
Lithuania
Liberalų Sąjūdis
Lithuania
Demokratesch Partei
Luxembourg
Partidul National Liberal
Romania
Sloboda a Solidarita
Slovakia
Državljanska Lista
Slovenia
Liberalna Demokracija Slovenije
Slovenia
Pozitivna Slovenija
Slovenia
Zares - socialno liberalni
Slovenia
Convergència Democràtica de Catalunya
Spain
Centerpartiet
Sweden
Folkpartiet Liberalerna
Sweden
Democraten 66
The Netherlands
                                41

Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie
The Netherlands
Liberal Democrats
United Kingdom
                                   42

Catherine Bearder MEP brought representatives from local small
fishing fleets to Brussels to present their case for the vital importance
small fleets have in their local communities and for the sustainability
of fish stocks - a real breakthrough as previous talks have been
dominated by the big fleets. When she is re-elected, Catherine has
promised to fight for local jobs. And she adds: “I’ll keep fighting
against human trafficking too. Important steps have been made in this
parliament but national governments need to do more to work together
to tackle this truly international crime.”
Phil Bennion MEP was a key player in making sure that European rules
were adopted on the flight times pilots can fly, making European skies
safer and providing a level playing field for UK airlines. His priorities now
include the opening up of competition amongst railways across Europe
to bring down the costs of rail travel for passengers, helping the
economy and the environment. Phil adds: “I want to ensure principles of
better regulation are central to European policy making and that
Europe’s single market doesn’t only benefit big companies but small and
medium-sized ones too”
Sharon Bowles MEP chaired the European Parliament’s Economic and
Monetary Affairs Committee and played a critical role in helping
keep the Euro-zone intact, preventing a collapse that would have
damaged the whole of Europe including the UK. She helped bring about
major changes to banking legislation, including greater
transparency and better terms for financing trade and small businesses.
She believes Members of the European Parliament should now focus
on using the strong cartel-busting powers of the European Union to stop
consumers being ripped off.
Chris Davies MEP led the cross-party alliance that secured a huge
majority in the European Parliament in favour of ambitious reforms to the
Common Fisheries Policy that ended wasteful discards, made it a legal
obligation to rebuild fish stocks, and decentralised day-to-day
management of fisheries. Chris says: “The European Union
must demonstrate its ability to innovate and lead or we will be left behind
by fast-growing economies elsewhere. I want to promote the application
of new technologies that can keep us competitive while reducing our
global warming emissions. I want to ensure that our high environmental
standards are applied equally and effectively in all EU countries. I want
to strengthen and protect the values of freedom and justice, democracy
                                       43

and good governance that lie at the heart of the European vision and
can be an inspiration to the world.”
Bill Newton Dunn MEP has been a passionate advocate of greater
democracy and accountability within the European Union. When he is
re-elected, he will campaign for even more effective Europewide
action to counter cross-border criminal gangs who are stealing millions
of legitimate jobs and hundreds of billions of tax revenues. Bill explains
why this needs to be done at a European level : “28 national
governments all trying to work with each other has obvious limitations.
Last year, there were just 18 cross-border co-operation teams involving
the UK. Just 18 in the face of massive and growing cross-border crime!
This can be tackled by more effective European crimefighting too”
Edward Macmillan-Scott MEP launched the Single Seat campaign in
2010 to end the European Parliament’s monthly trek between Brussels
and Strasbourg, which wastes £150m and 19,000 tonnes of CO2 a year.
His Food Sense campaign aims to focus European agricultural policy on
providing an affordable, sustainable and healthy diet, while providing a
stable future for our farming and fishing communities. When he’s re-
elected, he wants to continue leading the fight for human rights
worldwide, especially in Russia and China.
Fiona Hall MEP has campaigned to put energy saving at the heart of
European policy. From 2020, new buildings across Europe will require
nearly-zero energy, and car emissions will have to average only
95g/km by 2021. She believes Liberal Democrats in the next European
Parliament should campaign for an ambitious package of climate and
energy measures to put the European Union on track to meet
demanding carbon reduction targets by 2050. She’d also like to see
roaming charges for mobile phones completely abolished, protecting
business travellers and holidaymakers alike from huge mobile phone
bills.
Sarah Ludford MEP, as an ardent opponent of the death penalty,
securing a ban on the export of anaesthetics which were being used to
carry out US death sentences, forcing the EU to match its words about
opposing the death penalty with tough action. “When I’m re-elected”
says Sarah “ I want ensure London keeps benefitting from European
co-operation on trade, cross-border crime and the environment. I will
push for the trade deal with the USA that could boost London’s economy
by £2 billion. I will continue my fight to improve standards of justice
                                       44

across Europe by pushing for reform of the European Arrest Warrant so
that it is used fairly and proportionately. On the environment, I want to
ensure European air quality rules aren’t weakened”
Angelika Schneider, Liberal Democrat candidate for the European
Parliament, wants to follow other Lib Dem MEPs who have successfully
championed jobs in their regions. She says: “my number one priority
when I’m elected will be promoting the North East as an ideal place
to invest and create sustainable local jobs. I want jobs protected in key
industries like the chemicals and steel industry on Teesside and I’ll work
to create confidence in major companies like Nissan and Hitachi who are
investing millions locally and creating thousands of local jobs directly and
in their supply chains across the region. And I want to promote tourism in
Northumberland and County Durham which employs thousands of local
people”.
Andrew Duff MEP has been involved in many critical negotiations which
have helped to strengthen democratic accountability within the
European Union over recent years. As a member of the European
Parliament's constitutional committee, he works to improve transparency
and citizen participation in European politics and has strongly promoted
co-operation with national parliaments – complementing the work of the
UK’s Liberal Democrat MPs who are campaigning to improve the
scrutiny of European decisions by the UK parliament. Andrew is also
involved in the EU's enlargement process which encourages applicant
states like Turkey to improve their human rights record, strengthen the
rule of law and protect minorities . At home, Andrew is keen to promote
the East of England as Europe's hot spot for science research. Andrew
says: “I want the UK fully involved in all decision-making about the future
of the European Union, not sidelined into secondclass.”
Alec Dauncey, Welsh Liberal Democrat candidate for the European
Parliament, is keen to represent Wales in the European Parliament.
Wales has benefited massively from Britain’s EU membership, Alec
wants to see jobs safeguarded in a stronger Welsh economy taking
advantage of Britain’s place in the EU. A forester, passionate about the
environment, he is convinced that dangerous climate change can only
be avoided if countries work together. He wants to see the
Common Agricultural Policy go on supporting farming communities in
Wales and increasingly benefiting wildlife and landscape. Alec says:
UKIP and the Conservatives are spreading dangerous uncertainty about
                                      45

Britain’s place in an uncertain world, Plaid Cymru question Wales’s place
in the UK, Labour are avoiding the issue. Only the Liberal Democrats are
arguing clearly for Wales and Britain in a Europe which works for people,
secures our economy and our place in the world.
                                     46

Liberal Democrats
Stronger Economy Fairer Society
Published and Promoted by Tim Gordon
on behalf of the Liberal Democrats at 8-10
Great George Street, London, SW1P 3AE.
Printed by Harding Print Solutions Ltd at 7
Pier Rd, Feltham, Middlesex TW14 0TW.
ISBN 978-1-907046-90-2 © April 2014
                                    47

